TA $
@

~@XaS
Volume 50

Published by the Society

Fort Worth, Texas

1979

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas. The
Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history,
prehistory, and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the Society, it
encourages scientific collection, study, and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of
the Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1978-1979
President: LESLIE DAVIS (El Paso)
President-elect: ANNE FOX (San Antonio)
Secretary-Treasurer: HOWARD MUHM (Dallas)
Editor: EILEEN JOHNSON (Lubbock)
Assistant Editor: CAROLYN GOOD (Omaha, Nebraska)
Newsletter Editor: DOYLE GRANBERRY (Dallas)
Immediate Past President: JAMES E. WARREN (Sanderson)
Directors (in addition to the above): JOHN HEDRICK (El Paso), JOHN
HERBERT (Houston), JACK HUGHES (Canyon), R. L. TURNER JR. (Ft.
Worth), PATRICIA WHEAT (Houston), JAMES WORD (Floydada).
Regional Vice Presidents: ROBERT SMITH (Stinnett), CLAUDE
BROWN (Lubbock), JAMES EVERETT (Arlington), ROBERT VERNON
JR. (Sherman), MARGIE CHAFFIN-LOHSE (Houston), GRANT HALL
(San Antonio), JACK KLATT (Corpus Christi), JOHN STOCKLEY
(Quemado), W. L. RICHMOND (Austin), JANE SCHWEITZER (Midland),
CYNTHIA GREEN (Iraan), and RAY FREDLUND (Plaquemine, La.).

Memberships and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows:
Regular--S12.00; Chartered Societies and Institutional--S12.00; Contributing--$25.00; Life--S250.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter mailed about
four times a year. A monograph series, Special Publications, also is published
by the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to and including Volume 39,
that are still in print, may be obtained for $5.00 per volume. Subsequent
volumes are available at a cost of $12.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Southern Methodist University,
Box 161, Dallas, Texas 75275.
©Copyright by the Texas Archeological Society, 1979

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 50/1979

Eileen Johnson, Editor
Carolyn Good, Assistant Editor -- Book Reviews

Cover design by Gerald Urbantke

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT FT, WORTH, TEXAS
1979

FOREWORD
The year 1979 marks the 50th anniversary of the Texas Archeological
Society. It is to the celebration of this anniversary that this volume is dedicated. The Society has experienced considerable growth and support
through the years; and counted among its members, a number of exceptional
and often colorful individuals who have made lasting contributions to the
Society and to Texas archeology.
The anniversary issue further is dedicated to Cyrus N. Ray, founder of the
Society, and his original supporting compatriots, E. B. Sayles, W. C.
Holden, Rupert N. Richardson, Otto O. Watts, Julius Olsen, and Frank
Grimes. In this volume, we would like to honor all those who have supported
the work of the Society.
The Historical Perspective section of Volume 50 was designed as a narrative of events. The article by E. Mott Davis on the history of the Society from
1929 to 1954 (first 25 years) should be particularly enjoyable to long time
associates and informative to younger members. It provides a much needed
research and documentation of the Society and its members. We look
forward to the next part on the second 25 years of the Society, scheduled for a
future volume.
James Word’s chronicle of events leading to the establishment of the
Office of the State Archeologist exemplifies the dedication and leading role of
the Society in the development of Texas archeology. The accomplishment
demonstrates the interrelationship of amateur and professional toward the
common goal of cultural preservation.
Our appreciation is extended to Gale Richardson, Texas Tech University
Bulletins Editor, for her time, guidance, council, and patience. We would like
to thank contributors to Volume 50 for their aid in producing this anniversary
edition of the Bulletin. It is our hope that the Society continues to grow and
maintain a leadership role in Texas archeology throughout its next 50 years.

Eileen Johnson, Editor
Carolyn Good, Assistant Editor -- Book Reviews

Table of Contents
Papers
Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas
Frank A. Weir ..........................................

5

The Old Tom Burial, Dickens County, Texas
Mark L. Parsons, Ronnie Hill, and Wayne Parker ....................

69

Prehistoric Bison Populations of Northcentral Texas
Mark J. Lynott ..........................................

89

A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast
L. W. Patterson .........................................

103

Notes
The Use of Worked Potsherds as Ceramic Scrapers:
Evidence from the Tularosa Basin, New Mexico
Nancy Kays Smiley ....................................... 125
A Preliminary Report on the Little Pin Oak Creek Site
(41FY53): A Campsite with Clovis, Plainview, and
Subsequent Artifacts, in Fayette County, Texas
Joseph B. Wilson ........................................

135

High Resolution Photography for Archeology
June Secrist

...........................................

141

Reviews
Texas Archeology: Essays Honoring R. King Harris,
Kurt D. House
James E. Corbin .........................................

147

Historical Archaeology: A Guide to Substantive and
Theoretical Contributions, Robert L. Schuyler
James E. Ivey ..........................................

148

A Field Guide to Conservation Archaeology in North America,
Georgess McHargue and Michael Roberts
E. Mott Davis ........................................... 149

In Mernoriurn
Robert F. Heizer (1915-1979)
Thomas R. Hester ........................................ 151

Historical Perspective
A History of the Texas Archeological Society and the
Establishment of a State Archeologist
James H. Word ......................................... 153
The First Quarter Century of the Texas Archeological Society
E. Mott Davis ...........................................

159

Authors .............................................. 195

Frank A.
ABSTRACT
The Greenhaw site is a prehistoric locality that has a group of nine burned rock
middens. Assemblages belonging to different Archaic phases were found to cluster
at specific middens indicating horizontal differentiation in the occupations. Data
reinforce the chronology of phases in the Central Texas Archa (Weir, 1976) and
contribute to burned rock midden interpretation.

INTRODUCTION
The Greenhaw site (41HY29) is an open camp site attributable to the
Archaic stage of Central Texas prehistory. The site, consisting of nine burned
rock middens, is situated at the confluence of two small streams that are
tributary to Onion Creek in Hays County, Texas. This paper presents a
description of the artifacts and cultural sequence at the site as determined by
excavation at six of the burned rock middens.
The site was chosen for investigation because material obtained from it by
private collectors indicated that the middens were of different ages and excavation would contribute to the knowledge of Central Texas prehistory. It
was felt that a study of the midden stratigraphy and horizontal distribution of
projectile points and other artifacts would result in the definition of cultural
and chronological units within the site.
The site was first reported in 1963 but had been known locally for many
years. Archeological investigations were begun in March 1964. Working late
evenings and on weekends with volunteer labor, field work was finally completed on August 27, 1966.

ARCHEOLOGICALBACKGROUND
Pioneering efforts in Central Texas archeology were published by Pearce
(1932), Sayles (1935), Ray (1938, 1948), and Kelley (1947a, 1947b,
1959). With the Suhm et al. (1954) publication, various interpretations of
Texas archeology were brought together in one volume. Suhm (1960) presented a more comprehensive study of historical developments of Central
Texas archeology. Johnson et al. (1962) distinguished Early, Middle, Late,
and Transitional periods within the Archaic. These periods were based primarily on variations of projectile point types. This periodization has since
found wide acceptance and common usage.
At Youngsport, Shafer (1963) recovered a point type named Gower.
This type was found stratigraphically below artifacts which Johnson et al.
(1962) termed Early Archaic. Johnson (1964) reported a similar situation at

6

Texas Archeological Society

the Devil’s Mouth site. However, Johnson (1964) called his early stemmed
points "early barbed." Archaic material was being collected that was much
older than the Early Archaic of Johnson et al. (1962). Sollberger and Hester
(1970:339) recognized these materials as belonging to still another Archaic
period, labeling it the Pre-Archaic.
Kelley (1947) was the first to apply the Midwestern Taxonomic System to
Central Texas assemblages. Although his foci have fallen into disuse, the term
Edwards Plateau Aspect has continued in use. Recently, Weir (1976a,
1976b) suggested that the term aspect was not appropriate as applied to the
Central Texas Archaic. He proposed eliminating Edwards Plateau Aspect
and reference to Early, Middle, and Late Archaic. A construct of phases was
suggested to supplant the older system.
Weir (1976) defined five phases for the Central Texas Archaic. They are:
The San Geronimo Phase (8,000 to 4,500 B.P.)~ The Clear Fork Phase
(5,000 to 4,000 B.P.); The Round Rock Phase (4,200 to 2,600 B.P.); The
San Marcos Phase (2,800to 1,800 B.P.)~ and The Twin Sisters Phase (2,000
to 700 B.P.). This system is less restrictive since changes can be made (i.e.,
substitution, addition, or elimination). The proposed designation of the sys~
tem approximately equates with previous designations: San Geronimo -Pre-Archaic~ Clear Fork - Early Archaic; Round Rock = Middle Archaic;
San Marcos -- Late Archaic; and Twin Sisters = Transitional Archaic. The
new designations are followed.

THE SITE
The Greenhaw site (41HY29) is located on the eastern edge of the
Edwards Plateau (Fig. 1). It is situated on the northern slope of a hill overlooking the confluence of Cottonwood and Little Bear creeks, west of the town of
Buda, Hays County, Texas. The two intermittent streams join at the southern
edge of a valley that was produced by the downcutting of Little Bear Creek
and its tributaries.
Little Bear creek runs along the base of the hill on which the midden area
of the site is located (Fig. 2). At this point, the creek formed a low bluff. At one
time, the stream ran several hundred feet north from the hill as indicated by an
old channel scar in the flood plain below the site. Artifacts are found on either
side of the old channel and up to the bluff, indicating that some occupation,
however minor, had occurred.
The slope on which the midden area of the site is located is composed of
alternating soft and hard strata of the Fredericksburg group, Comanchean
series, Cretaceous age limestones. Erosion produced stair-stepping on the
slope as a result of inclined weathering of the softer marl and joint weathering
of the hard strata. The softer strata appear as slopes of about 15° while the
harder outcrops appear as flat ledges averaging 20 ft across~
The bluff is composed of a rather thick outcrop of hard limestone projecting slightly from beneath a softer stratum which in turn is capped by a thinner
hard stratum forming the bluff top. This capping stratum constitutes the unit
designated Ledge #I. Cultural debris, including most of the middens, is most
heavily concentrated above this ledge. Chipping debris is most noticeable on
the ledges, which were numbered in progression from bottom to top (Fig. 2).

Weir- Greenhaw

7

The middens range in diameter from 16 to 105 ft, with maximum depths
from 6 to 50 in. Only the middens, among the cultural evidence, have any
significant depth.

THE FIELD WORK
The site was first divided arbitrarily into eight areas in order to maintain
control in the collection of artifacts from the surface other than on the burned
rock middens. These surface areas are indicated by Roman numerals. From
east to west, the middens were designated A through I (Fig. 2). A nail driven
in a tree on the edge of Midden C was given the arbitrary designation of
N100W100 in a grid oriented on magnetic north. All coordinates over the
site, except at Midden E, are relative to that designatiom A separate grid
orientation was employed on Midden E because of a unique feature found in
this midden.

EDWA R D S
tPLATEAU
Greenhow

Fig. 1 Location of the Greenhaw site.

8

Texas Archeological Society

o-

%.

\
Fig. 2 The Greenhaw site showing the location of the various excavated middens
above Little Bear Creek and surface collection areas of the site.

Weir- Greenhaw

9

For the most part, excavated squares were removed in arbitrary 6 in
levels. However, in Midden C, several other methods were also used experimentally.
During 1964, relic collectors were constantly at work in Midden C. The
degree of their concern with what was being attempted varied from person to
person, thus limiting the degree of cooperation received from them. For the
most part, materials recovered by collectors were only useful in the total count
of artifacts and in horizontal distribution within the midden.
In the course of excavation, stone size was determined to be important in
determining stratigraphy since some zones contained larger burned rock than
others. Rocks are discussed as boulder (greater than 25 cm), large (10 to 25
cm), medium (6 to 10 cm), and small (less than 6 cm).

Midden B
This midden is one of the smallest at the Greenhaw site, measuring 25 x
35 ft with its long axis north to south, and seldom reaching 18 in in depth.
Excavations consisted of three squares, 5 x 5 ft each, dug in the central part
where cultural accumulation was thickest. With the exception of one small pot
hole, vandalism had not occurred at this midden. An estimated 10% of the
midden was removed.
There are three definite zones in Midden B, designated A, B, and C from
bedrock to surface (Fig. 3).
Zone A: This basal zone is found in all areas and is frequently interrupted by Zone B.
Sediment color is a light greybrown and texture is somewhat ashy. Large rocks are

PROFILES

OF

Greenhow Site

--

N -.,--"n

...._¢w,

]

Zone A

]

Zone B

]

Zone C

MIDDEN

B

41 HY 29

~$

..% ...... %,,.

w~

~E

.... ~_w ....... %, ..... o¢,,o

o

I

2

3 ft.

Fig. 3 Profiles showing the stratigraphy and feature location in Midden B.

10

Texas Archeological Society

common but show little indication of being burned; few are cracked. Everything in this
zone is covered with a calcium carbonate crust. The bedrock is also covered by this crust;
some of the rocks and artifacts were cemented together and to bedrock.
Zone B: This is the thickest zone, in some areas extending from surface to bedrock. The sediment is brown to almost black. This zone is characterized by large to boulder sized rocks
that are larger than in any other midden at the site. Most show signs of being burned, but
only a few were heated to the extent that they cracked and disarticulated. These rocks
were found in all squares excavated and are presumed to occur throughout the midden.
Since they cover the thinner cultural Zone A, it is assumed that they were brought to the
midden from the ledge above rather than being flagstones from the underlying soft
limestone. Snail shells are abundant, especially from Helicina and Polygyra. Rabdotus
occurs only in small numbers. This situation is in contrast to the frequency of these
genera in Midden C.
Zone C: This is the topmost zone. Occasionally, rocks from Zone B protrude through Zone C to
the Surface. Sediment is compact, dark brown to black, and contains a large amount of
fire cracked midden rocks such as are found in Midden C. Rocks are small to medium;
percentage of rock to dirt is about 60% to 40°%.

Midden B-Burial 1 (Fig. 4)
A burial (designated Burial 1) was found in the northern half of square
N105/W55. Most of the skeletal material had decomposed, leaving teeth
and fragments of the calvaria, mandible, and long bone shafts. Age and sex
determinations were made by Michael B. Collins (University of Kentucky).
The sex judgment was based on comparison of the femoral shafts with
those of the more complete male individual in Burial 2 from Midden C. The
degree of femoral robustness was similar in the two individuals; accordingly, it
is likely that Midden B Burial I is a male. The teeth were better preserved than
the bones and demonstrated considerable wear during life. The person appears to have been above the age of 30 at the time of death.
Positioning of the bone fragments indicated that the burial was in a loosely
flexed position, on its right side with the head to the east. The lower extremities were resting on midden debris of Zone A and the head was propped
against a small hummock of bedrock with at least one arm flexed under the
chin. Four large boulders, two of which were slightly exposed at the surface,
were aligned over the burial, east to west, the largest being placed over the
head.
A small, clear quartz crystal and a small, round hematite pebble were at
the base and slightly to the west of the skull. Numerous flint flakes occurred
around the burial, but recognizable artifacts were not found. One small lanceolate point found beneath the burial (in Zone A, cemented to bedrock) is
considered not to be associated with the burial. Because of their provenience,
it is possible that the small crystal and hematite pebble were probably in a
perishable container around the neck of the individual. This material constitutes the only possible burial association.
Some of the covering boulders were exposed at the surface and part of the
skeleton rested on bedrock. With this situation, it is impossible to determine
with certainty when this individual was buried. Burial was later that the midden, but possibly as early as the Clear Fork Phase.
MIDDEN B-FEATURE I. LARGE ROCK CONCENTRATION: This
feature is a large, inverted, bowl shaped heap of stones, most of them larger
than 15 cm in diameter. They are associated with Zone B and comprise a
small mounding of the large rocks within that zone. The feature measures 2 x

Weir- Greenhaw

11

3 ft and almost reaches the surface. The sediment is black and the feature may
constitute a hearth or a dumping of hearth stones. However, neither possibility is verifiable. Cultural debris is slightly more abundant within the feature
than in adjoining areas.
MIDDEN B-FEATURE 2. LARGE ROCK CONCENTRATION: This
feature (Fig. 3), almost a duplicate of Midden B-Feature 1, is in Zone B. A
concentration of eight quartz crystals and two small unclassified stemmed dart
points were found within the feature.
Midden C
Midden C, situated about 50 ft above the bluff overlooking the confluence
of Little Bear and Cottonwood creeks, is the second largest midden at the site

BURIAL I-MIDDEN B

quartz

and

hematile

Bones

presen’t in

Bones

absenf

Rocks

covering

due

pebbles

burial
to

deteriorafion

sketol

remains
CM L 1976

Fig. 4 Plan view of Burial 1 (Midden B)

12

Texas Archeological Society

(70 × 85 ft), yielding the largest artifact sample. It is separated from Midden B
to the east by a small gully. Midden thickness is greatest (21/2 ft) next to this
drainage. From this side, the midden becomes thinner, fanning out to the
west and south.
From November, 1963, until Mr. Greenhaw’s death in January, 1965,
this midden was in the greatest danger of being destroyed by relic collectors. It
was also during this time that the bulk of controlled work was done at the
midden. Twenty two squares were dug by collectors while the author was
present at the site, affording an opportunity to record what they found. Unfortunately, an area of approximately 40 squares was totally vandalized, resulting in a complete loss of information from these units. Controlled excavation
consisted of 211/2 5 ft squares, two test units, and one trench.
While working on Midden C, it was concluded that due to inadequate
observation and methods of excavation, a clear picture of burned rock middens was not presented in earlier reports on this type of site. For this reason,
several techniques were employed at Midden C in order to determine the best
procedure by which the character of a burned rock midden could be specified.
The first approach applied was the vertical face method, used during
WPA by Jackson and Woolsey (1938) and again by Kelly (!960) at the
Crumley site. In this method, excavation is carried on from surface to bedrock
by means of a vertical face which is moved forward as excavation proceeds.
Frequency of the larger and most noticeable artifacts found in situ is quite
high. Kelly (1960:242) indicated an artifact loss of less than 5% by this
method, but the author would place this loss closer to 20-30% if chipping
debris is included.
The one advantage to the method is that artifacts found in situ can be
placed more precisely in their stratigraphic relationship. Vertical measurements were made from the highest point in the unit excavated. There were
two random test units, eight 5 × 5 ft squares, and one 5 × 19 ft trench
(Trench I) excavated by this method. It proved to be the most rapid of all
methods.
The second approach, excavation by 5 × 5 ft squares in arbitrary 6 in
levels, is one most employed prior to 1965 (Suhm, 1959:220; Johnson et
al., 1962:17). At Midden C, measurements were made from the highest
corner in the square. Due to rock abundance in the matrix, one aspect of the
first approach was utilized. For each level, a 6 in deep trench was excavated
at one side of the unit. The face created was moved across the square until
the entire level was removed. The tool used was a small military pick mattock. The loose earth was passed through a I/4 in mesh hardware cloth.
Artifact loss by this procedure is near zero. Nine and one half squares were
excavated by this method, three of which were not screened.
A third approach, using only a whisk broom and an ice pick, was employed on four squares on the southwestern periphery of the midden.
Depth in these units from surface to bedrock averaged 8 in. This approach
proved to be the most time consuming, but the most accurate.
The internal structure of the midden is as follows (Fig. 5):
Zone A: This is the basal sediment, reddish tan in color with a mixture of much unburned
limestone and rotten limestone derived from bedrock and a minor amount of burned
and cracked limestone. This zone is represented only in the southern half of the
midden. Cultural debris is scattered lightly throughout the zone.

Weir- Greenhaw

13

Zone B: Grey brown in color, this slightly ashy, burned rock accumulation is found only in the
southeast quarter of the midden. It contains both medium and large rocks, neither size
dominating. Rabdotus are very common. Cultural debris is not abundant.
Zone C: Sediment is grey brown except near the surface where it is nearly black due to recent
decaying organic matter. Organic processes on the midden formed a natural humus
zone that spans the entire surface. Zone C contains small to large burned rock.
Characteristics that’separate this zone from others are rock size, large amount of
gravel, flint chipping debris, and whole and crushed snail shells. This zone is restricted
to the southwestern portion of the midden. Although small in comparison to other
zones, its artifact yield was very high.
ZoneD: This is the most widespread zone in the midden, being thickest in the central portions,
extending toward the north and west. Sediment is a dark ashy brown and almost black
in the upper portions where it is penetrated by the humus stain. All sizes of midden
rock occur throughout the zone. One size may predominate over another in some
portions of the zone and sporadically small areas occur where almost no rocks are
present. From one square to the next, artifact yield varied greatly, from high to almost
nil. This zone is very similar in appearance to Zone B, differing in distribution and in
lack of consistency in rock size.
Zone E: This zone represents one of the last occupational periods of the midden. Sediment is
black with a high content of burned rock. Some gravel occurs throughout, but snails
and chipping debris are scarce and artifact yield is less than in the deeper zones. The
zone usually occurs as a veneer over Zone D in the central part of the midden, but
probably occurs locally in other parts of the midden. Its contact with underlying zones
is characterized by undulations (probably cultural disturbances).
Zone E’: This zone is similar to Zone E only in that it also is a late zone. Zone E seems to blend
into Zone E’ in the eastcentral part of the midden. Zone E’ has more gravel, snails, and
flint flakes than Zone E. The zone resembles Zone C, except that it does not contain
large rocks. Zone E’ overlies Zones B, C, and D and is restricted to the southeastern
portion of the midden.
Zone F: This is the final zone, a black humus sediment of most recent origin. It contains few
rocks and no artifacts, except those intruded by disturbances.

MIDDEN C-BURIAL 2 (Figs. 5, 6). The one burial in Midden C, Burial
2, was a secondary burial below point N86/W109 in the southeast portion
of the midden, where the midden is thickest. The burial pit originated from
Zone E’ and penetrated through Zones B and A to bedrock. During the
accumulation of Zone E’, a pit was dug, near the edge where Zone B angles
from thicker to thinner deposits. The bones were then deposited with a
veneer of midden sediment, rocks, and large amounts of Rabdotus snails.
Large flat rocks, averaging about 20 cm in diameter, were placed on top of
the deposit.
Apparently a fire was built on these rocks after they were placed over the
burial. All were burned, cracked, and articulated but broke apart when removed. A thin layer of fine black sterile sediment 2 to 3 in thick covered the
rocks. The final step was the capping of this sediment with four boulders. The
smallest measured 15 x 23 x 28 cm and the largest 23 x 31 × 36 cm.
Artifacts recovered from the burial fill (see artifact descriptions) include
five dart points: two Pedernales (Variety 11), two Bulverdes (Variety 1) and
(Variety 11), and one Zorra. One Core Form 1, one Scraper Form 5, one
Scraper Form 8, two Biface Form 3, one Biface Form 4, eight biface fragments, and numerous flint flakes also were found. It is assumed that the
artifacts were not burial offerings but rather a mixture of artifacts from those
zones through which the burial pit passed.
Any offerings that might have been placed with the burial cannot be distinguished from material in the original midden detritus. However, the Pedernales (Variety 11) points, which were found at the bottom of the burial pit,

14

Texas Archeological Society

~+

H

S

z
w

>
I

J

DD

0

m

Fig. 5 Stratigraphic profiles noted in Midden C.

Weir- Greenhaw

15

are a form recovered only in Zone E’ and E-D elsewhere in Midden C. Therefore, the burial is no older than the Pedernales points and may date to the
Round Rock Phase.
Some of the bones show rodent gnawing. It is likely that the bones were
exposed to the elements or where rodents could reach them prior to burial in
Midden C, further indication of secondary interment.
The skeletal analysis was made by Michael B. Collins and Thomas S.
Ellzey. Skeletal remains recovered include:
1) Cranial: posterior section of left parietal; small posterior section of
right parietal; small fragment of left occipital; frontal section of left
supraorbital torsus; two molars and one incisor.
2) Appendicular: right radial shaft; left radial shaft fragments; shaft and
proximal end of left humerus; shaft and proximal end of right hu-

BURIAL 2-MIDDEN C
o

skull fragments.,

,.-" ~/2 / ~
Burial

i~

"i-.8~

-

P i t -~.~.

~’D"<~-,s k u I I

fragments

bedrock

Burial 2

in

profile

CMLI976

Fig. 6 Plan and profile of Burial 2 (Midden C).

16

Texas Archeological Society

merus~ lateral portion of the spinous process of the left scapula~ section of right clavicle~ right femoral shaft~ left femoral shaft; right tibial
shaft~ shaft and proximal end of left tibia.
3) Thorax: posterior sections of four ribs and fragments of two thoracic
vertebrae.
4) 212 unidentifiable bone splinters.
Examination of the skeletal material indicated the individual was a young
male, about 5 ft 8 in, between 19 and 23 years of age at the time of death. This
individual was not particularly robust as indicated by some attributes of the
bones. Attributes of the upper limbs fall within the female variation of known
prehistoric populations.
MIDDEN C-FEATURE 1. ARTIFACT CACHE: This feature was found
by relic collectors in the northwest quarter of the midden. Notes taken at the
time document the feature as a small cache of artifacts clustering below point
N98.5W128 around a large rock at 21 in below the surface and 4 in above
bedrock. The sediment was tam it is presumed that the feature was in Zone A.
Artifacts included a complete Palmillas point, the proximal half of a Bulverde
(Variety 111), one Gouge Form 5, one large percussion cortex flake, and two
large thinning flakes. The association may be fortuitous and the term cache
probably inappropriate.
MIDDEN C-FEATURE 2. LARGE ROCK AND CULTURAL REFUSE
CONCENTRATION: This feature consisted of four large flat rocks, three of
which were stacked, ranging from 13 to 19 in in maximum diameter. The
smallest was 10 in northwest from the others. A small silicious limestone
grinding stone was between the smallest one and the larger three. It measured
15 × 12.5 × 3.3 cm and is smooth on only one face. One Langtry dart point,
the stem of an unidentified dart point, one Core Form I, one secondary
cortex flake, three billet flakes, and a small rectangular piece of sandstone
(ground smooth on one face) were found around the grinding stone and on
the south side of the three larger rocks. This feature rested on the contact of
Zones A and D, and is presumed to be associated with Zone D.
MIDDEN C-FEATURE 3. ARTIFACT CONCENTRATION (Fig.
5): This feature was a heavy concentration of lithic artifacts occurring at the
base of the contact between Zones C and D. Prior to deposition of Zone D, the
downhill side of Zone C (the only part covered by Zone D) was unusually
steep (see profile, Fig. 5). It was at the base of this small but steep slope that
these artifacts accumulated and were later covered by Zone D. Whether or
not this concentration occurred as a result of erosion or due to intentional
placement was undetermined.
This feature occurs in Trench 1 and was tabulated as being in Zone C.
Artifacts recovered include one Shumla point, one Bulverde (Variety 1), one
Large Stemmed Point, two Mano Form 2, one Core Form 3, one Core flagment, one hammerstone, two biface fragments, six large secondary cortex
flakes, and eight small thinning flakes.
MIDDEN C-FEATURE 4. SNAIL SHELL CONCENTRATION: This
feature was an extremely dense concentration of Rabdotus snail shells covering an area 3 ft in diameter and about 3 in thick at the contact between

Weir - Greenhaw

17

Zones A and D. This concentration is almost identical to the snail shell concentration found with Burial 2. The associated artifacts with this feature are
proximal halves of two biface Form 3 specimens.
INTRAZONE CULTURAL DISTURBANCES. These apparent disturbances comprise undulations in the contact between Zones D and E. They
represent possible hearth pits or other forms of cultural activities. They are
marked simply by variations in burned rock size and change in sediment
color. They also indicate the degree of disturbance that can occur between
two components within a burned rock midden.

Midden D
Midden D is the smallest midden (16 x 21 ft). It is 120 ft due south of
Midden C, on the south edge of Ledge #2. It generally had a depth of less
than 6 in.
Because of its shallowness and narrow dimensions, this midden was
tested by a single 5 x 5 ft square. The midden sediment was black and very
compact. The single zone contained fire cracked rocks of medium size, grading to large in the northern half of the square. Rabdotus snail shells were quite
common but appear to be smaller than those found in Midden C.

Midden E
Midden E (Fig. 7), which might be called a ring midden, is about 100 ft
southwest of Midden C. This midden is centrally located in the site, overlooking Cottonwood Creek rather than Little Bear Creek. The portion of Ledge
#I below Midden E no longer constitutes a bluff but grades into a steep slope
to the flood plain below.
Midden E is of medium size relative to the other middens. Its longest axis is
along a southeast to northwest line. Its dimensions are 65 × 40 ft. Its greatest
depth, 24 in, was at the center.
The midden was undisturbed prior to excavation. There was a slight depression about 10 ft in diameter at its center, giving it a ring appearance. The
depression, indicating a possible central pit, is most noticeable from the uphill
side. In order to bisect the depression parallel to the midden axis, a southeastnorthwest line was set. Seven 5 × 5 ft squares were excavated along the
southwest side of the line. Beginning at the southeast point, N00!W250,
squares were designated A through G. Each square was excavated in arbitrary 6 in levels with vertical measurements being made from the highest and
easternmost corner of each square.
Three zones of occupation, designated A through C, are represented in
the profiles (Fig. 7).
Zone A: This is the basal zone and covers the bedrock floor of all squares except a section in
square E and the southeast half of square A~ This zone is dark brown in color with
occasional lenses of ashy brown sediment oecuring throughout it. Zone sediment is
particularly noted for its extreme friability~ The zone seems to be lighter in color near
bedrock. As this zone increases in thickness, it becomes darker at its upper margins.
Flagstones and bedrock spalls occur frequently throughout with about an equal number
of fire cracked rocks present. Medium sized rocks are most conspicuous. This zone is in
contact with both Zones B and C. Where it underlies B, the amount of cultural debris

Texas Archeological Society

18

w
O4
b--

W

[]

o
N

>-r

[]

Z
(h

o
o
N

o
N
b_
0

[]

b0

w~
.J

w
._I

0

o
N

U_
0

13-

[]

13.

i÷I

o
~=

(D

°li
m
o
N

[]
o
N

o
N

[]

[]

Fig. 7 Stratigraphy of Middens E and F. Note the pit in the profile from Midden E.

Weir - Greenhaw

19

present was quite low; while that area under C provided a greater number of artifacts.
Squares F and G were especially productive.
Zone B: The sediment of Zone B is very compact and brown to almost black at the top. This zone
was recognized at the surface in squares A, B, and C. Burned and fire cracked rock
constitute very high percentage of midden matrix (about 70% rock to 30% sediment).
Gravel and medium and large burned rocks occur throughout this zone. Larger rocks
are most conspicuous in squares B and especially C. Although flint flakes, snail shells,
and other minor habitational indicators are common in this zone, artifact yield was quite
~OW.

Zone C: This zone represents the last major occupation at Midden E and is the largest component investigated. It occurs in squares C through G and is demarcated from Zone B in
square C by a marked change of burned rock size. The angle between Zones B and C is
almost 40°; rocks in Zone B at this point are large while those in Zone C at this point are
medium to gravel size. The distinction between Zones C and A at their contact is less
conspicuous. It was determined mainly by the friability of Zone A.
Zone C sediment is black to brown in color. Percentage of rock to sediment may be
slightly less in Zone C than in B. As Zone C grades away from B, the rock size increases.
Almost boulder size rocks appeared in the lower levels Qf squares D, E, and F and then
diminishing somewhat in G. This situation is due in part to the most outstanding feature
found at Greenhaw. The slight central depression was a large pit penetrating Zones C to
A, in squares D and E.
Artifact yield of Zone C was very high. The zone produced the predominant type of
dart point found in Midden E, that of Bulverde (Variety 11). Amount of snail remains
found was far below that of Zones A or B. An increased amount of gravel was noted in
the top level of squares F and G.
Zone D: This is a noncultural zone that is mostly a black humus with inclusions of erosional debris
from upslope. The sediment and gravel found within the central pit, although probably
identical in origin, are tabulated separately from Zone D. Both post-date the burned
rock midden.

MIDDENE-FEATURE 1. PIT (Fig. 8): This feature is a large pit, primarily in Zone C, that was bisected by the trench, appearing in squares D and E.
Originally, the pit was about 10 ft in diameter and centrally located in the
midden. It was lined with large rocks at its base and along its north wall (Fig.
7). When abandoned, the pit filled with erosional debris (gravel, sand, black
humus, artifacts, etc.). It was then capped by the humic Zone D. The pit
apparently represents the last major activity at the midden since cultural disturbance was not noted through the pit.
MIDDEN E-FEATURE 2. SNAIL SHELL CONCENTRATION: This
feature consisted of a dense concentration of Rabdotus snails in square B at
the contact between Zones A and B. This concentration measured I x 1.9 x
0.3 ft.

Midden F
Midden F is the largest of the nine middens (105 x 85 ft), with a maximum depth of 50 in. Its longest axis is oriented southeast to northwest. The
lower margins encroach onto Ledge #I. At this point, Ledge #I is level with
the flood plain of Cottonwood Creek and appears only as a flat exposure of
bedrock with the top sediment eroded. The southeastern and uppermost
edge of Midden F begins at Ledge #2 and dips away rather steeply since the
slope cuts back into the hill at the west of the midden.
This midden was initially vandalized in 1917 (earliest recollection of
several residents of San Marcos, Texas). About 75/% of the midden was
destroyed by such activity. In an attempt to obtain an artifact sample from the

20

Texas Archeological Society

midden, areas were selected that showed little or no evidence of being disturbed. Three 5 × 5 ft squares were excavated in the southern portion of the
midden and a unit 5 x 8 ft was excavated in the central part. All were
oriented with magnetic north and excavated in arbitrary 6 in levels to bedrock.
Excavation showed the midden to have five major zones (Fig. 8). An
attempt was made to distinguish intrazonal characteristics by noting change in
size of burned rock; however, unlike Middens C and E where this was possible, it proved impossible at this midden. In all zones, small to large burned
rock was present and mixed. Zones were best distinguished by sediment
texture and color, amount of gravel present, and minor habitational debris
such as snail shells and flint flakes.
Zone A: This basal zone appeared as a veneer over the bedrock. It reached 12 in in thickness at one point but was usually less than 6 in thick. It is light brown in color where it
overlies hard limestone and more tan where it covers a softer marl. Unburned flagstones
and bedrock spalls are common throughout with about an equal amount of fire cracked
rock present. In the central portion, it becomes more friable where there was less mixing
with decaying bedrock. Huge boulders and Rabdotus snail shells are common. Flint
flakes are scarce, occuring as large percussion spalls. Few artifacts and thinning flakes
are present.
Zone B: This zone is found only in the central test unit and one of three squares at the
southern end. It is thick, over 24 in at one point, and penetrates to bedrock in one
square. Rock sizes are completely mixed and rocks are burned. The sediment is grey
black and very ashy. Lithic debris is unusually scarce; snail shells few, and in some parts,
artifacts and flint flakes nonexistent.
Zone C: The sediment is brown to black. Fire cracked rocks make up a very high percentage of zone fill. Zone criteria are extremely high percentage of gravel, whole and
crushed snail shells, flint flakes, and artifacts. The zone is found only in the southern
portion of the midden. Its lower margins are in contact with both Zones A and B.
Zone C is slightly lighter in color at its contact with Zone A.
Zone D: Found in all areas excavated, Zone D is the most extensive and covers Zones B
and C. The sediment is black in color and very compact. Color is in part due to recent
humic activity which also penetrates the uppermost limits of Zones B and C. Burned
rock constitutes about 70% of zone fill and grades from medium to large. Although
some areas seems to have one size dominating, there was no distinct demarcation
between areas with different rock size. Pea gravel occurs in small lenses. Amount of snail

Fig. 8 North view of Midden E profile. The pit can be seen to the left of the rod at
center.

Weir- Greenhaw

21

shells, flint flakes, and artifacts was high; however, these materials were not as concentrated as in Zone C.
Zone E: This zone is primarily a post-midden, depositional feature which caps much of the
midden, filling depressions and other surface irregularities The sediment is very black
and compact. It contains few rocks and those are pebble size. Flint flakes and other
cultural items occur, apparently washed in from upslope.

Midden G
At one time, this midden occupied an area 35 x 50 ft, with its longest axis
running southeast to northwest. Midden G is located below and 50 ft to the
west of Midden F, on the flats created by Cottonwood Creek. The limestone
bedrock at the base of this midden constitutes Ledge # 1 to the east.
Areas for testing were extremely limited since at least 90% of the midden
was destroyed by a relic collector using a front-end loader. Two test units were
placed in the eastern and southern peripheries to obtain an artifact sample; a
third test (3 x 5 ft) was excavated in a small, undisturbed hummock left in the
south-center section. The lowest level in the latter reached a maximum depth
of 20 in.
The revealed zones cannot be considered representative of the entire
midden; however, they indicated the cultural sequence. Midden G bridges
the Clear Fork and Round Rock phases. Three district zones were noted.
Zone A: Sediment in the basal zone is reddish brown. It contains numerous bedrock spalls
and a few burned rocks. Percentage of rock to sediment was about 50/50. Cultural
debris occured throughout the zone.
Zone B: Sediment is dark brown to black, very compact, penetrated by modern rootlets,
and stained by decayed organic matter. Rocks are burned and of medium size. Percentage of rock to dirt is about 60% to 40%. Rabdotus snail shells occurred in quantity and
the number of artifacts recovered was high. This was probably one of the richest zones
from any midden on the site.
Zone C: This zone is essentially sterile. Sediment is black and very compact, being of recent
organic origin. In appearance, it compares with Zone E of Midden F.

MIDDEN G-FEATURE 1. ROCK CONCENTRATION: This feature,
3 ft diameter mounding of large and medium burned rocks in Zone B, was
similar to those noted in Midden B. Percentage of rock to dirt is about 80% to
20%. One Marshall and two Pedernales (Varieties I and 11) dart points, one
Knife Form 2, one distal fragment of a biface, one piece of red ochre, and 36
percussion flint flakes were found in the feature. Non-artifactual material included 17 fragments of mammal (deer?) long bone, numerous mature snail
shells (Rabdotus, Helicina, and Polygyra), and three snail shells of Mesodon.
This feature possibly represents a single dumping of debris (Sorrow, 1969;
Hester, 1970).

SURFACE COLLECTIONS
Certain middens and selected areas were not excavated but extensive
surface samples were made (Fig. 2).
Midden A
This midden is located at the eastern end of the site. It measures 60 x
40 ft, with its longest axis running north to south. Depth was undetermined

22

Texas Archeological Society

but probably at least 18 in. The large bifacials and dart points (Zorra, Tortugas, and Pedernales) recovered may indicate a history similar to that of Midden C.

Midden H
This midden is on the flats below Middens F and G, 40 ft due west of
Midden G, overlooking Cottonwood Creek. It measures 50 x 40 ft, with its
longest axis northwest to southeast. Depth was undetermined and surface
artifacts were rare.

Midden I
This midden is situated at the marl base of the slope at the western extremity of the site. It is separated from the other middens, the nearest (Midden H)
being 250 ft to the northeast. It is somewhat crescentric in shape with a depression in its uphill side. The midden measures 45 x 30 ft, with its longest
axis from east to west. The depth and association were undetermined.
Surface Area I
This area is the lower slope of the hillside overlooking Little Bear Creek
between the bluff and Ledge #2 and between Middens A and C. Middens A
and B, although within the confines of the area, are considered as separate
units. A surface feature is a concentration of cracked hearth stones slightly
more than 100 ft west of Midden A. It covers an area 15 ft in diameter, with
no depth.

Surface Area II
This area is directly uphill from Surface Area I and has the same east-west
limits. The artifactual material comes primarily from Ledges #2, #3, and #4.
As elsewhere in the site, the concentration of artifacts and chipping debris is
heaviest where a burned rock midden (in this case, Middens A, B, and C) is
directly below.
Surface Area III
This area includes the central portion of Ledge #I and the slope above
that ledge to Ledge #2. It is bounded by Midden C to the east and Midden F to
the west. Although Midden E and most of Middens C and F are included in
this area, they are dealt with separately. Most artifacts recovered seem to
relate to Midden E and F; chipping debris is particularly heavy on Ledge #1
below Midden E.
Surface Area IV
One of the smallest surface areas, it includes part of Ledges #2, #3, and
#4 and extends from Midden D, situated on Ledge #2 to the east, to Midden F
to the west. The dart points found are from the Clear Fork phase.

Weir- Greenhaw

23

Surface Area V
This area is a triangular section fanning out to the northwest from Midden
F. It includes a large exposure of Ledge #I and the area on the flats below
Ledge #1. The artifacts found on the exposure of Ledge #I are like those
found within Midden F.
A surface feature is made up of two concentrations of thermal fractured
chert cobbles. Both concentrations are on the Ledge #1 exposure directly
below Midden F and were probably associated with that midden. The smaller
of the concentrations, which is nearest Midden F, contained 87 cobbles and
covered an area 12 ft in diameter. The larger concentration had 134 cobbles
and was 16 ft in diameter.
Cobbles ranged from 7 to 20 cm in diameter. They are siliceous material
that occurs naturally on the hill above the middens. Because of the nature of
the cobbles and random arrangement, it does not appear that they were
hearth stones; they may have been used for stone boiling (T.N. Campbell,
personal communication). This type of chert cobble occurs as isolated specimens in most of the middens.

Surface Area VI
This area lies between Middens F and I and extends down the slope below
Ledge #2 to the flood plain of Cottonwood Creek. Scattered artifacts and
chipping debris are scarce.

Surface Area VII
This area is directly above Surface Area VI and includes the western
portions of Ledges #2, #3, and #4. There is little indication of habitation even
though Middens G, H, and I occur below.

Surface Area VIII
This area is the valley floor on the north side of Little Bear Creek, across
from the site proper. It includes the area on either side of the old creek channel. Dart point types found include unidentified Paleoindian fragments,
Buda, Carrizo, Ensor, Figueroa, and Lange, indicating a temporal span from
Paleoindian through Archaic.

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS
The artifacts, after being cleaned and catalogued, were divided into categories of chipped stone, miscellaneous stone, bone, shell, etc. These categories were subdivided morphologically according to names customarily used
(i.e., bifaces, unifaces, choppers, drills, etc.) and previously devised type
names.
Provenience of each artifact type is given in terms of zones within each
midden in Tables 1 through 6. Where the arbitrary 6 in levels cross cut or
were located on contact areas of different zones, an indication notes that the

24

Texas Archeological Society

artifact cannot be placed in either of the two zones, For example, where
provenience is given as Zone B-C, the artifacts are found at the transition of
Zones B and C. Those artifacts that are known to come from the pit located in
Midden E, squares D and E, are given the provenience of Feature 1--Pit. For
those artifacts in Midden E that occurred at the contact of the pit and Zone C,
the provenience indication is C-Pit.
Type names used for projectile points are those of Shum et al. (1954),
with additional types Gower (Shafer 1963), Figueroa and Zorra (Johnson
1964), Carrizo (Hester and House 1963), and a tentative new type, Buda
(Weir, 1967). There are seven provisional types and miscellaneous categories.
Types are standardized and thorough descriptions found in other publications. Complete descriptions are omitted except where varieties and new
types warrant it. However, non-projectile point iithics are given more descriptive attention. Morphological divisions within the various categories do not
necessarily follow those of other authors and in some cases, have proved
important in Weir’s (1976) definition of Archaic phases.

ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE
The great majority of artifacts found at the Greenhaw site are of chipped
stone. The heavier items, such as choppers and large bifaces, were made
from coarse grained siliceous material obtained in the immediate area. Thinner bifaces, such as dart points, were made from fine grained Central Texas
cherts. This material was probably obtained from distant stream channels or
quarried from outcrops in areas other than the site vicinity.

Arrow Points
SCALLORN (I Specimen): one of three artifacts found at the site attributable to postArchaic times.
YOUNG (1 Specimen): a type now thought to be a preform rather than finished form.
ARROWPOINT FRAGMENT (1 Specimen): positive identification not possible.

Large Stemmed Bifaces
CONTRACTING STEM (7 Specimens; Fig. 9A-B): blades broad and triangular; stems
contract to extremely convex or slightly concave bases, Such specimens have been typed Almagre (Suhm et al., 1954).
LARGE STRAIGHT STEM (3 Specimens; Fig. 9C-D): blade leaf-shaped to triangular;
shoulders are rounded to slightly barbed.
LARGE EXPANDING STEM (5 Specimens; Fig. 9E-F) : blades appear to have had slightly
convex to slightly recurved edges; strong shoulders or slight barbs prominent; stems broad and
slightly expanding with concave bases (one exception); stem edges smoothed.

Dart Points
BUDA, tentative new type (20 Specimens; Fig. 10A-C): blades slender and leaf-shaped;
slightly twisted blade or slightly beveled stem or both; stems slight to almost nonexistent; where
discernable, stem seldom more than I/4 total length of point, and generally from I/5 to I/6 total
length; stem edges slightly expanding to straight and sometimes smoothed; base slightly convex
to slightly concave; flaking totally percussion on cruder specimens.

Weir- Greenhaw

G

F

E

25

i

i

L
H

0
M

N

Fig, 9 Large Stemmed bifaces: A-B) Contracting Stem; C-D) Large Straight Stem; EF) Large Expanding Stem. Dart Points: G) Angostura-Plainview; H-J) Angostura; KL) Paleoindian dartpointfragments; M) Gower (Variety I); N) Gower (Variety II); O-P)
Uvalde.

26

Texas Archeologicul Society

An increasing amount of pressure flaking occurs as workmanship improves. Workmanship
varies from poor to good. Usually, points are thick relative to their width. L: 5.5 to 9.5 cml MW:
2.2 to 2.7 cm; MT: 0.8 to 1~1 cm.
This type, previously described (Weir, 1967:39), does not occur frequently in sites. When it
does, it is usually classed as Travis, Nolan, or Pandale. Ray (1938:198-199) was probably the
first to recognize it as a type: his Clear Fork I. Kelly (1947:97) lumped Ray’s Clear Fork I and II
into the type Nolan Beveled Stem.
A smaller variety of the Buda type, termed Provisional Type 1, was recognized by Nunley
(Nunley et al., 1965:57) as occuring with Pandale dart points. The type was noted but referred to
as Nolan~Pandale-Like (Shafer, 1967:49) in the Robert Lee Reservoir Survey (Coke County,
Texas). The Buda type seems to have a different distribution from those it resembles (Travis,
Nolan, and Pandale). These types were not found in the Robert Lee Reservoir survey (Shafer,
1967).
In Midden C at Greenhaw, this type is restricted to the southwestern portion of the middem
types Nolan and Travis show no particular clustering and Pandale does not occur. However,
both Buda and Nolan are numerous in Zones D-E and F. Buda occurred at Parida Cave, Val
Verde County (Alexander, 1970:22). At Coontail Spin, Val Verde County, Pandale was found
from Zone A-3 (near the top) to 11 ft below the surface; provisional Type 1 occurred with
Pandale at depths from 5 to 9 ft below the surface (Nunley et al., 1965:Table 2)~ It would seem
that the Buda type may have experienced popularity during part of the same time range as the
Nolan type in Central Texas and Pandale type in the Trans-Pecos area.
Of Travis, Nolan, and Pandale, the Buda type more closely resembles Pandale. It differs
from Pandale in that its range in size is greater~ it does not have parallel flaking~ is more crudely
made~ and has a different distribution.
ABASOLO (1 Specimen): basally thinned; triangular~ convex base.
ANGOSTURA (3 Specimem Fig. 9D-J)
Two specimens from Midden C are small proximal sections with rechipped distal ends (one
made into a drill).
ANGOSTURA-PLAINVIEW (i Specimem Fig. 9G): slender lanceolate blade with slightly
expanding corners at the base~ lateral edges smoothed near base~ flaking oblique parallel and
inclined from lower to upper right; base slightly concave and slightly bifacially beveled.
This specimen compares well with similar artifacts recovered from the Levi Rockshelter, a
Paleoindian site located 20 mi northwest of Greenhaw (Alexander, 1963:514, Fig. 2C, D).
BULVERDE, VARIETY I (59 Specimens~ Fig. 11A-C): strong shouldered to barbed with
triangular blades~ stems rectangular to slightly contracting, constituting about I/3 the total length
of the point; basal thinning by short longitudinal flakes~ bases straight to slightly convex.
This is a major Early Archaic type and second only to the Pedernales type in the Middle
Archaic (Johnson et al., 1962:121). It is a type that transcends the end of the Clear Fork and
beginning of the Round Rock Phases. It is the predominant point type from Midden C.
BULVERDE, VARIETY II (40 Specimens~ Fig. 11D-E): blades triangular with straight to
slightly convex edges that are sometimes parallel just above the shoulders~ shoulders prominent
but rarely barbed; stems rectangular and usually convex; basal thinning lacking. Variety II is
somewhat narrower in blade and stem width than Variety I. Specimens of Variety II are frequently found with rechipped or reshaped blades.
At the Landslide site, this variety was found along with similar specimens with longer and
narrower stems which were referred to as Bulverde-Like (Sorrow et al., 1967:14). In Midden C,
this variety, unlike Variety I, occurs in Zone DI however, it is most numerous in the peripheral
Zone F. In Midden E, 13 specimens of Variety II and two of Variety I were found. At present, it is
not clear which is the earlier variety although separation of the two seems valid.
BULVERDE VARIETY III (6 Specimens~ Fig. 1 IF-H) : blades triangular with slightly convex
edges; stems narrow and contracting~ average length of stem longer than in Varieties I and II~
bases slightly concave.
CARRIZO (1 Specimem Fig. 10T): blade edges and base slightly convex and corners
rounded~ single notch in center of base. Primary distribution of this type is southwest Texas
(Nunley and Hester, 1966).
CASTROVILLE (3 Specimens~ Fig. 12K-L)
EDGEWOOD (1 Specimen)
ENSOR (3 Specimens; Fig. 12D)
FAIRLAND (1 Specimen; Fig. 12C)
FIGUEROA (I Specimen) (Johnson, 1964)

Weir- Greenhaw

A

27

B

K

G

M

T

0

Fig. 10 Dart Points: A-C) Buda, D-E) Travis, F-G)Nolan (Variety I), H-I Nolan (Variety II), J-K) Zorra~ L) Morrill, M-N) Wells, O-P) Frio, Q) Abasolo, R-S) Tortugas, T)
Carrizo.

28

Texas Archeological Society

A
D

H

L
M

5i

era,

0

Q

R

S

Fig. 11 Dart Points: A-C) Bulverde (Variety I); D-E) Bulverde (Variety II); F-H)
Bulverde (Variety III); l-J) Pedernales (Variety I); K-M) Pedernales (Variety II); N-P)
Pedernales (Variety liD, Q-S) Pedernales (Miscellaneous).

Weir- Greenhaw

29

GOWER, VARIETY I (I Specimen; Fig. 9M): blade triangular with a slight beveling twist to
the left; stem expanding, deeply notched, and lateral edges smoothed; stem almost I/2 the total
length; multiple burin blows on both shoulders.
This specimen varies from the type specimens in the twisting of the blade and stem width
(Shafer, 1963). However, it does compare well with Gower-like points found in Llano County,
Texas (Crawford, 1965: 76-78) and is similar to Baker points from Val Verde County (Word and
Douglas, 1970:21).
GOWER, VARIETY II (I Specimen; Fig. 9N): triangular blade; slight shoulders; contracting, bifurcated stem; lateral edges of stem unifacially beveled; no noticeable attempt to thin the

base.
This specimen was found at the maximum depth of the basal zone in Midden F. It was deeper
than any other artifact and is considered the oldest dart point within that midden. Although this
specimen does not conform to specifications for a classic Gower type, it does closely resemble
Variant A (Shafer, 1963: Fig. 7G).
LANGE (8 Specimens; Fig. 12M-N)
LANGTRY (5 Specimens; Fig. 12A)
This type is quite common in West Texas extending down to the Rio Grande River. It occurs
in South Texas and Northeast Mexico as a minor type and rarely In Central Texas (Suhm et al.,
1954:438).
MARCOS (1 Specimen; Fig. 12J)
MARSHALL (4 Specimens; Fig. 12F-I)
Although generally considered a Late Archaic type, it was suggested that the Marshall type is
transitional between the Round Rock and San Marcos Phases (Weir, 1976; Denton, 1976).
MORRILL (i Specimen; Fig. 10L)
NOLAN, VARIETY I (41 Specimens; Fig. 10F-G): blades triangular to leaf-shaped; stems
alternately beveled on right side and rectangular to slightly expanding in outline.
At Midden C, only Bulverde and Travis points are more numerous than Nolan points. At
Midden G, Nolan is the dominant type.
NOLAN, VARIETY II (4 Specimens; Fig. 10H-I): stems alternately beveled to the right;
blades broad with marked alternate left bevels almost creating a twist.
The blade twist distinguishes this variety from Variety I. However, they are not to be confused with the Pandale type.
PALMILLAS (3 Specimens; Fig. 12E)
PANDORA (4 Specimens; Fig. 120)
PEDERNALES, VARIETY I (26 Specimens; Fig. 11f-J) : blades triangular and barbed; stem
edges parallel to slightly convex; base deeply to moderately concave; bases thinned by short
longitudinal flakes.
The Pedernales type is the predominant dart point type at Midden F and Variety I is the most
numerous of the three varieties.
PEDERNALES, VARIETY II (15 Specimens; Fig. IlK-M): narrower than Variety I; slight
shouldered.
PEDERNALES, VARIETY III (9 Specimens; Fig. 11N-P)
These specimens are identical with a variety found at the Wunderlich site, Comal County,
Texas (Johnson et al., 1962:25). It seems to occur later in time that Varieties I and II.
PEDERNALES, MISCELLANEOUS (15 Specimens; Fig. IIQ-S)
This category may represent stemmed knives (Suhm, 1959:236).
SHUMLA (1 Specimen; Fig. 12B)
Shumla points occur in norther Tamaulipas, Mexico and is most common in West Texas,
extending down the Rio Grande into South Texas. It occurs only rarely in Central Texas (Suhm
et al., 1954:480).
TORTUGAS (30 Specimens; Fig. 10R-S): triangular, stemless point; blade and base edges
straight to slightly convex; strong basal thinning, producing a narrow edge-like longitudinal section; alternately beveled to the left (4 specimens) or to the right (3 specimens).
Tortugas is one of four major dart point types from Midden C and has the same horizontal
distribution as the Nolan type. It occurs over most of Midden C, but appears most numerous in
Zone F in the western section. Tortugas occurs in numbers great enough to be considered a major
type in a Central Texas burned rock midden.
Hester (1971) refers to them as Early Triangular and Late Triangular. In a site near San
Antonio (Texas), Hester and Kohnitz (1975) found them in extremely early Archaic context.
Weir (1976) placed them in both the San Geronimo and Clear Fork Phases. They definitely
belong to the Early Archaic period.

30

Texas Archeological Society

A

D

C

B

iI

E

\\

G

F

\
\
\

M

5~

cm.

N
0

Fig. 12 Dart Points: A) Langtry, B) Shumla; C) Fairland; D) Ensor; E) Palmillas, F-I)
Marshall; J) Marcos; K-L) Castroville; M-N) Lange, O) Pandora.

Weir- Greenhaw

31

TRAVIS (41 Specimens: Fig. 10D-E): lateral basal smoothing (three specimens).
The Travis type is found stratigraphically only in Middens C and E where it is a major point
type.
UVALDE (3 Specimens: Fig. 90-P)
WELLS (2 Specimens; Fig 10M-N)
The Wells type is usually found in Archaic components in East Texas sites but occurs rarely in
Early Archaic context in Central Texas (Shafer, 1962).
WILLIAMS (2 Specimens)
ZORRA (18 Specimens: Fig. 10J-K): blades triangular to leaf-shaped; in outline, closely
resemble Nolan but stem generally narrower: both edges of stem unifacially beveled on same face
(diagnostic attribute).
PROVISIONAL TYPE I (7 Specimens; Fig. 13A-C): deeply corner notched points; small
triangular blades, barbed to strongly barbed: stems slightly expanding to strongly expanding:
base concave to slightly concave: blades (2 specimens) show slight rechipping by pressure.
This type represents a San Geronimo Phase component and is one of the earliest forms at
the site. It may be related to the "Early Barbed" varieties from the Devils Mouth site (Johnson,
1964: Figure 11, J-S) and Devils Rockshelter (Prewitt, 1966:216). One specimen is identical to
the Early Archaic Untyped II (Shafer, 1963) from the Landslide site (Sorrow et al., 1967:22).
PROVISIONAL TYPE II (4 Specimens: Fig. 13D-F): blades convex and somewhat parallel
edged near shoulders: strong shoulders: bases thinned and slightly concave: stems long with
straight to slightly convex edges, giving them a slight bulbous appearance with sharp corners;
lateral edges sometimes smoothed.
One dart point of this type was found underlying points of the Clear Fork Phase at the
Landslide site and was classed as an untyped group 1 (Sorrow et al., 1967:20).
PROVISIONAL TYPE III (4 Specimens; Fig. 13G-I) : small triangular blade with small barbs;
small rectangular stem: concave base: stems longer than wide: light beveling (3 specimens) on
left side of stem carried up under the barb.
This type bears a close similarity to Langtry and Val Verde points.
PROVISIONAL TYPE IV (5 Specimens; Fig. 13J-L): small side notched dart points: stubby
blades: stems expanding with straight to slightly concave edges: corners sharp: base slightly
convex; stem about 1/3 total length of point; thick wedge-shaped longitudinal section due to
very little basal thinning.
PROVISIONAL TYPE VII (9 Specimens; Fig. 13Q-R): blade narrow, triangular with
straight to slightly convex edges: shoulders weak to prominent; stem I/4 to I/5 total length of
point and slightly concave: base usually slightly concave but can be straight: bilateral symmetry
almost perfect.
UNCLASSIFIED DART POINTS (44 Specimens).
In every artifact collection there are those projectile points that do not fall into recognized
type categories, do not occur in adequate numbers to justify a provisional or tentative type
category, and are left as artifactual anomalies and remain unclassified. The unclassified
Greenhaw ones are triangular and notched. Six specimens deserve special attention because of
their provenience below what were at one time considered the oldest Archaic types in Central
Texas. These specimens probably belong to the San Geronimo Phase and are from Midden B.
With the exception of specimens C and F, the unclassified points were found in the lower zones,
A and B. They reflect the earliest occupation at this midden and possibly at the site since they
underlie the Early Archaic types Traves, Bulverde, and Tortugas.
(Fig. 13S): stubby blade with slightly recurved edges; point side notched and barbs present,
although one removed by a lateral blow; stem I/3 total length of specimen and slightly bulbous in
character; slightly expanding stem with rounded corners and convex base.
(Fig. 13T): short; blade with convex edges; slightly shouldered; stem produced by shallow
side notches: base slightly concave; stem slightly more than I/4 total length of point; one side
notch bifacially chipped, while other side notch and slight basal concavity produced by low angle
unifacial beveling; lateral edges of stem smoothed: in outline, stem vaguely resembles those of
the Martindale type. (Suhm et al., 1954:446).
This specimen bears resemblance to the one above only in that it is stemmed. Both were
found in close proximity.
(Fig. 13U) : blade of specimen fractured but probably triangular, with either straight or slightly
convex edges; deeply corner notched: stem strongly expanding: barbs prominent: base slightly
concave.

There is a mere suggestion of recurving to the base similar to that found on the Martindale
type. However, this specimen’s stem flares more and is shorter than stems of the Martindale type.

32

Texas Archeological Society

B

C
D
E

G

F

H

M

N

0

Q

iI
/
\

S

T

U

0

V
5

~--~L_~__~
crn,

W

X

Fig. 13 Dart Points: A-C) Provisional Type I; D.E) Provisional Type II; G-I) Provisional Type III; J-L) Provisional Type IV; M-N) Provisional Type V; O-P) Provisional
Type VI, Q~R) Provisional Type VII; Unclassified.

Weir- Greenhaw

33

It bears some similarity to the Edgewood type (Suhm et al., 1954:418) and Provisional Type 1.
It also strongly resembles Early Corner Notched, Variety I. (Hester, 1971:72).
(Fig. 13V): blade broad, stubby, and triangular; basally notched, creating barbs with flat tips;
stem with short parallel edges and straight base.
(Fig. 13W): small, lanceolate dart point; base slightly convex and unifacially beveled; lateral
edges near base smoothed.
This specimen was the deepest found in the midden.
(Fig. 13X): proximal portion of a lanceolate biface; blade with convex edges, expanding
slightly at base; base slightly concave and thinned by short longitudinal flakes; lateral edges and
basal corners lightly smoothed; in outline, closely resembles Plainview Golindrina variety (Johnson, 1965:46, 48-49).
UNIDENTIFIED PALEOINDIAN POINT FRAGMENTS (2 Specimens): Specimen I (Fig.
9K)--distal section of a collaterally flaked dart point; Specimen 2 (Fig. 9L)--large proximal
fragment of a dart point; blade fractured just above lateral edge smoothing; distal-proximal burin
facet crossed specimen obliquely, removing one edge and the base.
UNIDENTIFIED PALEOINDIAN POINT FRAGMENTS (167 Specimens)
BIFACE FORM 1 (18 Specimens; Fig. 14A): large leaf-shaped bifaces with moderately
convex to strongly convex blade edges; distal end pointed.
Specimens constrict toward the base giving the appearance of a bipointed tool. The base is
one of the most diagnostic attributes in that it retains the nodule cortex or prepared platform of the
original flake. The artifacts are usually thick, but about 40% are well thinned. L: 10.6 to 13.7 cm.
At Midden C, this form is most numerous in Zones D and F in the southwest part of the
midden. This type is attributed to the Clear Fork Phase.
BIFACE FORM 2 (23 Specimens; Fig. 14B): blade edges convex, contracting near the base:
in a few specimens, lateral edges near base almost parallel: bases slightly concave to slightly
convex. L: 10 to approx. 14 cm.
These specimens are similar to Biface Form 1, with the exception that the bases were thinned
and cortex removed. This form occurs stratigraphically associated with Bulverde Varieties I and II
in Middens C, E, and F. It is attributed to the Clear Fork Phase.
BIFACE FORM 3 (80 Specimens; Fig. 14C): blades broad with slight to strongly convex
edges; edges often parallel near the base; base slightly convex with rounded corners. L: 8 to
15 cm.
This form seems to be universal and cannot be attributed to a particular phase~
BIFACE FORM 4 (22 Specimens; Fig~ 14D) : blades broad and triangular with slightly convex edges; basal corners usually sharp; base straight to slightly concave; well thinned. L: 8.0 to
10.5 cm.
BIFACE FORM 5 (32 Specimens; Fig. 14E) : blades triangular and slightly convex with sharp
to slightly rounded basal corners; some blade edges nearly parallel towards base; bases usually
straight, but vary from slightly convex to slightly concave. L: 6.0 to 8.5 cm.
BIFACE FORM 6 (20 Specimens; Fig. 14F): triangular blades; most with slightly convex
blade edges; some more slender specimens with crudely recurved edges; bases slightly convex to
straight, with slightly rounded corners. L: 5.8 to 9.0 cm.
BIFACE FORM 7 (53 Specimens; Fig. 14G): blade edges convex to strongly convex; cornets absent and rounded. L: 7.2 to 13.0 cm.
BIFACE FORM 8 (24 Specimens; Fig. 14H): oval to crudely rectangular; only one or two
edges thinned, with many showing use on these edges; corners rounded and edges convex, hi
6.0 to 12.0 cm.
BIFACE FORM 9 (18 Specimens; Fig. 141): slender biface blades, usually asymmetrical:
edges convex; bases irregular, sometimes showing remnants of a prepared platform. L: 7~3 to
10.0 cm.
This biface form is found only in Middens C and E where the Bulverde type of dart point is
the dominant type.
BIFACE FORM I0 (24 Specimens; Fig. 14J): broad asymmetrical biface blades; both edges
usually convex, with one edge more convex than the other; bases roughly straight to slightly
convex, several specimens exhibiting a large portion of the original striking platform. L: 5.0 to
11.0 cm.
BIFACE FORM 11 (11 Specimens; Fig. 14K): crude, roughly oval bifaces; characterized by
preparation of only one cutting edge while opposite edge exhibiting extreme thickness, prepared
platform, and/or cortex; blades pointed; base irregularly shaped or rounded. L: 6.8 to 12.2 cm.
Workmanship improves considerably toward the distal end.

34

Texas Archeological Society

B

F

C

H

5i

cm.

0

Fig. 14 Bifaces: A) Biface Form I; B) Biface Form 2; C) Biface Form 3; D) Biface
Form 4; E) Biface Form 5; F) Biface Form 6; G) Biface Form 7; H) Biface Form 8; I)
Biface Form 9; J) Biface Form 10; K) Biface Form II.

Weir- Greenhaw

35

BIFACE FORM 12 (16 Specimens; Fig. 15A)
These are probably flake knives that are unifacially chipped around the edges except at the
tip where fine bifacial work is exhibited. All retain the curvature of the original flake, resulting in a
plano-convex to keep shaped profile. L: 5.5 to 13.0 cm.
BIFACE FORM 13 (4 Specimens; Fig. 15B): blade edges convex; distal end rounded to
slightly pointed. L: 7.5 to 9.0 cm.
There was no attempt to remove the cortex from the proximal section. Where chipping has
occurred at the base, it resulted in beveling at about an 80° angle.
BIFACE FORM 14 (3 Specimens; Fig~ 15C) : thick oval bifaces with convex edges: one with
rounded base, while others slightly concave; slightly pointed; lateral edges showing extreme use,
demonstrating combined cutting and chopping. L: 10.3 to 11.5 cm.
BIFACE FORM 15 (5 Specimens; Fig. 15D): small, roughly Ionzenge shaped blades; angle
on tl~e lateral edge more distinct on one edge than on other. L: 7 to 9 cm.
BIFACE FORM 16 (5 Specimens: Fig~ 15E): almost bipointed, one end being more sharply
pointed than the other; one edge straight to slightly convex while other strongly convex; thickest
at the straight side, indicating strongly convex side probably the cutting edge. L: 8.5 to 12.3 cm,
BIFACE FORM 17 (3 Specimens; Fig. 15F): small; bases straight; corners sharp; edges
convex. L: 6.7 to 7.9 cm.
BIFACE FORM 18 (3 Specimens; Fig. 15G): slender, blade edges parallel to very slightly
convex; base straight. L: 9 to 10 cm.
These specimens are very similar to parallel edged knives from the Belton Reservoir (Shafer
et al., 1964:47).
BIFACE FORM 19 (67 Specimens; Fig. 15H-I) : very crude heavy bifaces; ranging in shape
from roughly triangular to roughly bipointed. L: 7.5 to 12.3 cm~
BIFACE FORM 20 (16 Specimens; Fig. 15J): almost round in outline; on some specimens,
portion of one edge retouched more than remaining edges, Maximum dimension: 5 to 12 cm.
The highest concentration of this form was in Midden C. It is apparently an important biface
in both the San Geronimo and Clear Fork Phases. They were previously classifed as oval bifaces
(Weir, 1967).
UNIDENTIFIED BIFACE FRAGMENTS (651 Specimens)
This category includes all biface fragments other than projectile points.
BIFACE BLANKS (36 Specimens) : percussion thinned bifaces showing no use but exhibiting a crude attempt at removing cortex of original pebble or large initial cortex flake from which
they appear to have been made.
These specimens are called blanks because of the thinning process employed here which is
preparatory to shaping. Twenty specimens retain little or no cortex.
PERFORATORS (17 Specimens; Fig. 16A-B)
Four specimens are perforator bits broken from the original artifacts. Six are bits chipped on
distal ends of blades of stemmed dart points. Two are chipped on blades of stemless dart points;
four on the distal ends of biface forms; and one on the proximal end of a biface. All exhibit light
percussion and pressure flaking. They apparently were made from complete or fragmentary
biface artifacts and were made from flakes.
CHOPPER FORM 1 (14 Specimens; Fig. 16C): bifacially chipped, retaining a large portion
of nodule cortex opposite working edge; chopping bit rounded to somewhat pointed.
CHOPPER FORM 2 (4 Specimens; Fig. 16D): somewhat oval to rectangular in outline;
bifacially chipped; most cortex removed and batter scars present on ends.
CHOPPER FORM 3 (9 Specimens; Fig. 16E).
These tools are examples of Core Forms 1 and 2 which were converted to chopping tools.
The longest edge is the one most utilized as a tool.
CHOPPER FORM 4 (5 Specimens; Fig. 16F): roughly rectangular bifaces, showing battering at one end due to chopping; most retaining a large portion of cortex on one side and
proximal end.
CHOPPER FORM 5 (11 Specimens; Fig. 16G): large, heavy percussion flakes having little
or no intentional alteration; batter scars present on one or more edges.
GOUGE FORM 1 (2 Specimens; Fig. 17A): thick, plano-convex; bifacially chipped; bit
convex and angles steeply from planar face.
GOUGE FORM 2 (8 Specimens; Fig. 17B): bifacially chipped; thick; convex bits beveled at
an angle between 30° and 45°; edges roughly parallel.
This form and Form i are attributed to the San Geronimo Phase (Weir, 1976).
GOUGE FORM 3 (4 Specimens; Fig. 17C): roughly triangular, bifadal; concave bits with
unifacial beveling.

36

Texas Archeological Society

t
J

D
G
0Icm"

Fig. 15 Bifaces: A) Biface Form 12; B) Biface Form 13; C) Biface Form 14; D) Biface
Form 15; E) Biface Form 16; F) Biface Form 17; G) Biface Form 18; H-I) Biface Form
19; J) Biface Form 20.

Weir- Greenhaw

37

They are a type of Clear Fork Gouge (Ray, 1938:197).
GOUGE FORM 4 (16 Specimens; Fig. 17D): triangular bifacials; bit edges convex.
The thicker specimens would fit well into the Clear Fork classification (Ray, 1938:197).
GOUGE FORM 5 (8 Specimens; Fig. 17E); unifacial; plano-convex and triangular in outline: bits and edges slightly convex.
This form is what Ray called a planar-gouge of the Clear Fork Culture (Ray, 1938:198).
ADZE (2 Specimens; Fig. 17F)
These specimens are unique in the collection. One specimen from Midden C is roughly
rectangular in outline, square in cross section, and wedge-shaped in longitudinal section (Fig.
29L). What is apparently the cutting bit is straight and shows use but no intentiona! alteration.
Lateral edges are unifacially chipped by percussion. An angle of 90° is reached on one edge and
105° on the other edge where the planar face meets the sides. These angles diminish towards the
distal and proximal ends.
The other specimen is a large percussion flake, plano-convex in cross section, and unifacially
chipped. It is rectangular in shape. One side retains part of the original cortex; the other side was
steepened by small percussion flakes from the planar face. The convex face was flattened by a
single percussion flake that was struck from the proximal end and curved over and through the
original spall, creating a squared working edge. This edge or distal end shows use and moderate
unifacial modification.
SCRAPER FORM 1 (7 Specimens; Fig. 17G): flake tools with a unifacially beveled edge;
bifacial modification of edge apparent.
SCRAPER FORM 2 (5 Specimens; Fig. 17H): most made from heavy cortex flakes and
unifacially chipped; characterized by projection of one chipped side in the form of a large and
slightly rounded point or nose.
Weir (1976) placed this form in the Clear Fork Phase.
SCRAPER FORM 3 (18 Specimens; Fig. 171): made from secondary and cortex hard hammer flakes: characterized by a single straight, unifacially chipped edge.
SCRAPER FORM 4 (52 Specimens: Fig. 17J): made from hard hammer percussion cortex
and secondary flakes; unifacially modified edge slightly convex to strongly convex.
SCRAPER FORM 5 (9 Specimens; Fig. 17K): single, slightly concave scraper edges; most
made on percussion cortex flakes, although secondary flakes common.
SCRAPER FORM 6 (3 Specimens; Fig. 17L): slightly crescent shaped: unifacially chipped
on two opposing edges; one edge convex while other concave.
SCRAPER FORM 7 (18 Specimens; Fig. 17M): crude end scrapers on rough, unshaped
spalls.
SCRAPER FORM 8 (70 Specimens; Fig. 17N): small; made from irregular secondary flakes
with one or more eages unifacially modified.
BURINS (51 Specimens; Fig. 18A-C)
Fourteen specimens were produced on hard hammer percussion flakes by removal of one or
more burin spalls along one edge. Eleven are dihedral burins.
Ten specimens were produced on bifacial fragments. They were produced by removing one
or more burin spalls from edges of either the distal or proximal ends of biface fragments. They
were struck from the snapped fracture of the original artifact. Three are proximal-distal while the
remainder are distal-proximal.
Twenty seven specimens were produced on projectile points. There are 16 that have distalproximal burin facets extending from the tip or a blade fracture. In most cases, these consist of
single burin blows; however, several specimens exhibit several multiple burin scars.
One specimen, a Bulverde (Variety II), has polyhedral burin flakes removed from one edge.
There is an example of burin flakes struck from the proximal end toward the distal end. Eight dart
points have small proximal-medial burin strokes removed from either the barbs or bases. These
run perpendicular to the center line of the point.
Types of projectile points found to possess burin facets are: Bulverde (Varieties I and II),
Castroville, Gower (Variety I), Nolan (Variety I), Pedernales (Varieties II and III), Tortugas,
Provisional Types I, IV, and VII, Paleoindian dart point fragments, and unclassified dart points.
BURIN SPALLS (6 Specimens)
These specimens were removed from biface implements~ From the edge workmanship,
indications are that one spall was removed from a dart point. Another specimen from Midden F
was found with its matching part, the base of a Biface Form 2. The other three specimens were
removed from heavier biface blades.
GRAVERS (49 Specimens; Fig. 18D) : small pointed projections chipped unifacially on flint
flakes and other unifacial tools (e.g., Biface Form 12); beaks often minute but range from 0.2 to
1.2 cm in length.

38

Texas Archeological Society

D

¢

Fig. 16 Perforators: A-B) Choppers: C) Form I; D) Form 2; E) Form 3; F) Form 4; G)
Form 5.

Weir - Greenhaw

39

Two specimens have multiple beaks.
NOTCHES (13 Specimens; Fig. 18E)
Two specimens occur on bifaces and 11 are hard hammer percussion and soft hammer
thinning flakes that have small, semicircular notches unifacially chipped into them.
GRAVER-NOTCHES (3 Specimens; Fig. 18F) : combination tools unifacially chipped onto
percussion flakes, exhibiting shallow, semicircular, unifacially chipped notches and minute
graver beaks.
SERRATED FLAKES (3 Specimens; 18G)
Two specimens are percussion flakes, one with eight serrations chipped along one edge and
the other with five. The smallest specimen from Midden B is a small (2.7 cm) billet flake with
fifteen minute serrations in one edge and eighteen in the other. Serrated flakes are more commonly found in the San Geronimo Phase.
CORE FORM I (47 Specimens; Fig. 18H)
This form retains an appreciable amount of nodule cortex. Specimens have multiple platforms and are still large enough so that additional, useable flakes could have been removed.
CORE FORM 2 (26 Specimens; Fig. 181)
This form differs from Form 1 in that most or all of the cortex was removed.
CORE FORM 3 (131 Specimens)
This category is made up of core fragments and completely exhausted cores.
STEMMED FLAKES (2 Specimens; Fig. 18J-K): simple percussion spalls with chipped
stems~
The larger of the two seems to have a bifurcated stem resembling a crude Pedernales stem.
The other has a roughly rectangular stem with a small basal notch.
CHIPPED PEBBLES (4 Specimens)
These are thin limestone pebbles chipped on the end or on one or more edges. Use is
problematical.
HAMMERSTONES (12 Specimens; Fig. 18L-M): converted chert bifaces or cores.
These tools are presumed to have been used in the manufacture of chipped stone tools or
other hammering tasks.
UNMODIFIED FLAKES (16,011 Specimens)
This category includes all forms of flint flakes. Many of the flakes were possibly utilized but it
was impossible to determine whether the slight edge nibbling on some was intentional or caused
by accidental contact.
A thorough analysis of the flakes was not attempted. However, a cursory examination
revealed that the number of well worked unifacials from the site was noticeably low while the
number of large, potentially usable flakes was very high. This situation is in accord with the great
number of bifaces recovered from the site. Apparently in the Clear Fork to Round Rock Phases at
Greenhaw, the chipped stone industry placed a greater emphasis on the manufacture of bifacial
implements rather than unifacial tools.

MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS
All stone artifacts that were manufactured by means other than by chipping were placed in this class. Methods include pecking, grinding, and
smoothing.
SCORED ROCK (30 Specimens; Fig. 19A)
One specimen, from Midden C, is of black slate. Another specimen from Midden F is of red
hematite. The remaining 28 are of chert on which the softer cortex exhibits random but intentional scoring. The chert specimens consist of nodules, cores, cortex flakes, and choppers.
MANO FORM 1 (19 Specimens; Fig. 19B)
These specimens are of sandstone, granite, and quartzite stream pebbles that were completely or partially shaped by pecking and then grinding. All but one specimen have two grinding
surfaces. Four specimens exhibit minor abrasion facets at the edge of the primary grinding surfaces. Three specimens were pitted at the center of the main grinding surfaces: two by pecking;
one by first pecking and then smoothing of the peck marks, giving the surface a slight concavity.
MANO FORM 2 (17 Specimens; Fig. 19C):unaltered stream pebbles except for smoothed
and polished surfaces; usually one but sometimes two surfaces (not necessarily flat) polished.

Texas Archeological Society

40

¢
A
D

G
H

K

Fig. 17 Gouges: A) Form I; B) Form 2; C) Form 3, D) Form 4; E) Form 5. Adze: F.
Scrapers: G) Scraper Form 1; H) Scraper Form 2~ I) Scraper Form 3; J) Scraper Form
4; K) Scraper Form 5; L) Scraper Form 6, M) Scraper Form 7, N) Scraper Form 8.

Weir- Greenhaw

41

In addition to possibly being used as grinding stones, Mano Form 2 specimens also may have
been used in hide tanning. The author witnessed (1960) stones exactly like these being used by
Cheyenne and Comanche Indians (Anadarko, Oklahoma) in the Indian tanning method. Using
this kind of stone, the tanning mixture was rubbed into the hides prior to softening.
MILLING SLABS (9 Specimens)
These specimens appear to be sections of milling stones with pecked and smoothed surfaces. One of the largest had a small circular depression (6.5 cm~ diameter) pecked into one
surface subsequent to breaking from the original slab.
UNCLASSIFIED GROUND STONE (I Specimen; Fig. 19D)
This specimen is a rectangular piece of hard sandstone with a small portion broken off one
end. It is somewhat flat, although a section through one side near the edge would appear hourglass shaped. Edges are sharp except at corners which are very bulbous and the thickest part of
the stone. This appearance was produced on all edges by biface bevel grinding that began at the
center of one edge and proceeded across the center of the stone to the other edge.
There is no indication of pecking. Minute grooves appear in the ground areas, which could
have been produced by the use of leather thongs. Dulling the edges of bifaces preparatory to
flaking could also produce such grooves. A similar specimen was found at the Cypress Creek site,
Hays County, Texas (University of Texas collection).
WACO SINKERS (3 Specimens; Fig. 19E-G)
One specimen is a hard, hematitic sandstone; others are quartzite. Specimens were notched
at both ends of their long axis, accomplished by pecking. The pecking completely encircles the
sandstone specimen.
This type of artifact was first described by Watt (1938) It has been suggested that these
artifacts, rather than being sinkers, were in fact bolas stones (T. N. Campbell, personal communication)~

BONE ARTIFACTS
BONE AWL (1 Specimen); deer (?) long bone splinter with one sharpened end.
CANINE TOOTH BEAD (1 Specimen; Fig. 18N) : small carnivore canine that has a groove
cut completely around the end of the root.
CUT BONE (2 Specimens)
One piece of deer long bone and one fragment of turtle shell have marks that appear to be
evidence of cutting as opposed to rodent gnawing.

UNMODIFIED ARTIFACT MATERIAL
Quartz, occuring as single small crystals or in crystal clusters, is found
weathering from the marly limestone formations on the lower slopes at the
site. It also occurs in all middens. In Midden B, a small concentration of eight
quartz crystal clusters were found in square N 110/W50 in Zone A-B. A single
crystal was found at the base of the skull of Burial 2.
Schist pebbles, an igneous stone, were recovered from Middens C and F
(one each). Because the geology of the site is sedimentary, the stones were
transported to the site. However, their use was undetermined.
Petrified wood is extremely rare in the Greenhaw vicinity. A single specimen, probably imported, was found at Midden C in Zone F.

FAUNAL MATERIAL
Bone was not well preserved anywhere in the site deposits. That which
could be identified was of deer, large fowl, and turtle. With the exception of
the small carnivore canine tooth, remains were almost exclusively deer at

42

Texas Archeological Society

B

C

G

D

K

M

Fig. 18 Burins: A-C. Graver: D. Notch: E. Graver-Notch: F. Serrated Flake: G.
Cores: H) Form 1, I) Form 2. J-K) Stemmed Flakes~ Hammerstones: L-M. Canine
tooth bead: N.

Weir- Greenhaw

43

Midden E. Examples of deer, fowl, and turtle were found at Midden C. Deer,
fowl, turtle, and racoon were found at Midden F. At Midden F, deer bone was
most abundant in Zones C, C-D, and D. Faunal material is completely absent
from Zone B.
Only four mussel shell valves were recovered from the entire site. One
value was found in Midden C, one in Midden E, and two in Midden F. Mussels are not found in the immediate vicinity of Cottonwood or Little Bear
creeks today.
Snail shells constitute the greatest body of faunal evidence. At certain
times, snails must have constituted an important part of the aboriginal subsistence, the most popular being Rabdotus (Bulimulus). Rabdotus concentrations were found in Middens C and E. A small size of Rabdotus was noted at
Midden D. Mature snails were not as large at the time this midden was being
accumulated as were those gathered when the other middens formed~ or the
aborigines were not gathering the mature specimens.
At Midden B, Robdotus was scarce while Helicina and Polygyra were
common. Those Rabdotus present are as large as those found in Middens C,
E, F, and G. In Midden E, Rabdotus was more common in Zone C than B. In
Midden F, Rabdodus was almost completely absent from Zone B.
Three specimens of the fresh water snail Helisoma were found in excavation, one at Midden E in Zone A-B and two at Midden F in Zone A.

POLLEN ANALYSIS
Twelve sediment samples were obtained from Greenhaw for pollen analysis: one from Midden B, five from Midden C, four from Midden F, and two
from the surface. Each sample was processed twice in the pollen laboratory of
the Botany Department of the University of Texas (Austin) under the direction of Dr. Donald Larson. Results were negative presumably because of the
nature of the sediment.
The sediment is extremely basic and has an unusually high count of fungal
spores. It is assumed that when the pollen grains reach the ground, they were
attacked almost immediately by fungi. Those not destroyed by fungus would
be destroyed by the basicity.

RADIOCARBON DATES
Four midden sediment samples were collected from Midden F. Midden F
produced mainly Pedernales points, considered to typify the Round Rock
Phase or Middle Archaic. Dates received were expected to be between 4000
and 3000 B.P. The time for the Round Rock Phase has since been revised to
4200 to 2600 B.P. (Weir, 1976).
Sediment samples were submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory,
Balcones Research Center, Universtiy of Texas (Austin). Radiocarbon dates
(Valastro et al., 1968:395-396)received are: 800 + 100 B.P. (A.D. 1150;
Tx-360), from square $160/W400 at the 0.5 to 1.0 ft level; 2850 + 90 B.P.
(900 B.C. ; Tx-451), from square $151/W420 at the 1.5 to 2.0 ft level; 2650

44

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

D

E

F

G

Fig. 19 A) Scored Rock, B-C) Manos Form 1 and 2; D) Unclassified Ground Stone;
E-G) Waco Sinkers.

Weir- Greenhaw

45

+ 80 B.P. (700 B.C. ; Tx-453), from square $151/W420 at the 1.5 to 2.0 ft
level; and 2900 + 100 B.P. (950 B.C.; Tx-463), from square $160/W400
at the 1.25 to 1.50 ft level.
By current estimates for the Round Rock Phase, Tx-360 is at least 1500
years too young. The probable explanation for this is the downward movement of modern charcoal, especially via deep cracks which form during dry
seasons. In recent times, brush and cedar stumps were burned in the area of
the site (and on Midden F), supplying a contamination source.
The other dates, from deeper in the midden, are slightly younger than
expected and possibly were affected by humic acid saturation. However,
expectations at the time of submission were based largely on speculation. The
wide discrepancy between Tx-360 and the other dates would not be due to
different pretreatment or variable degrees of humic acid contamination. Any
contamination was most likely by modern charcoal (Valastro et al.,
1968:396).
The older calculations show that dates can be arrived at from midden
sediments, but the degree of contamination can be expected to be higher than
in samples of hard carbon. The three dates are associated with materials that
are at least as old and possibly older than the dates.
At the Oblate site (Comal County, Texas), a comparable date of 3570 +
640 B.P. (1620 B.C. ~ Tamers et al., 1964:150) was obtained from charcoal
from a stratum containing Pedernales points. It is felt that this date is applicable to the Round Rock Phase or Middle Archaic (Collins, ms.). Although the
deviation for the Oblate site date is great, its highest limit overlaps the standard deviation of the oldest date from Midden F.
In another series of dates from Archaic materials at the La Jita site (Uvalde
County, Texas), Hester (1971) would possibly place the Round Rock Phase
around A.D. 100 for that area. At Arenosa Shelter (Amistad Reservoir), a
date of 4080 + 380 B.P. (2130 B.C.) was obtained from a zone bearing Val
Verde, Shumla-like, and Langtry dart points (Dibble, 1967:73). Johnson
(1964:96-97) placed these types in the Middle Archaic Period, paralleling the
Round Rock Phase in Central Texas.
The oldest three dates from Midden F are within two sigma variation.
Although the determinations are slightly younger than expected, they can be
considered useable dates with relation to the end of the Round Rock Phase in
Central Texas. The dates average 2,800 B.P. (850 B.C.). Johnson
(1967:39-40) calculates 2795 B.P. (845 B.C.) as the median date for Period
III which equates with the Middle Archaic, or Round Rock Phase.

CHRONOLOGY
An interesting characteristic of the site is its illustration of differential horizontal distribution of dart point types among middens of a single site. Most of
the evidence from Greenhaw comes from burned rock middens~ The artifact
assemblages from each midden appear to be dominated by dart point forms
singular to phases in the Archaic.
Jelks (1951) noted horizontal clustering of dart point types within burned
rock middens. However, it was not until later (Johnson et al., 1962) that the
time differences signified by the various Central Texas dart point types were

46

Texas Archeological Society

Table i
The Archaic Phases and Projectile Point Types from the Greenhaw Site
Archaic Phases

Projectile Points

TWIN SISTERS PHASE
2000-700 B.P.
(50 B.C. - A.D. 1250)
(= Transitional Archaic)

Figueroa; Fairland

SAN MARCOS PHASE
2800-1800 B.P.
(850 B.C.~ A.D.150)
(= Late Archaic)

Ensor; Lange; Marshall;

ROUND ROCK PHASE
4200~2600 B.P.
(2250-650 B.C.)
(= Middle Archaic)

Pedernales; Langtry;

CLEAR FORK PHASE
5000~4000 B,P.
(3050-2050 B.C.)
(= Early Archaic)

Bulverde; Travis; Nolan;
Zorra; Buda; Tortugas

SAN GERONIMO PHASE
8000-4700 B.P.
(6000-2750 B.C.)
(= Pre-archaic)

Tortugas; Gower; Uvalde;
Provisional Types I and II;
Unclassified; Early Barbed

Marcos; Castroville

Shumla; Almagre; Bulverde

organized into an orderly chronological sequence. Dart point forms change
through time and space, such changes being well illustrated at Greenhaw.
The horizontal distributions of the middens and the differences in dart
point types from each, and the not as distinct distribution of other lithic tools,
reflect temporal differences of the various occupations. Each occupation had
its own particular artifact assemblage. In the past, such a situation was inferred
(Suhm, 1959:245), but not supported by abundant evidence.
Midden B (Table 2) demonstrates the clearest stratigraphic separation of
cultural materials at the site. There were three zones. Dart point types such as
Travis (a Clear Fork type from the Early Archaic; Johnson et al., 1962:121)
occurred in the top zone. Dart points from the lower two zones are unclassified forms. The unclassified points undoubtably represent the San Geronimo
Phase, the earliest occupation at the site and one of the earliest periods in the
Archaic of Central Texas.
The distribution of artifact forms other than projectile points does not
seem significant. Biface Form 7 was not found at Midden B, but was found at
all other presumably later middens.
At Midden C (Table 3), the point types found indicate that it was predominantly occupied during the Clear Fork Phase. The preponderant type of dart
point is Bulverde, followed by Nolan, Travis, and Tortugas. Among the
minor types, only Provisional Type 1 had a definite distribution. Since it
occurred (other than as surface finds) only in the bottom zone in the southeast
quarter of the midden below the named types, it probably represents a San
Geronimo presence. The Pedernales varieties of the Round Rock Phase represent a minor, and one of the last, occupations of the midden.
Other artifacts found in Midden C include many biface forms. Biface
Forms I through 10 and 19 are dominant. Biface Forms 2, 11, 12 and 20 are

Weir- Greenhaw

47

Table 2
Provenience of Artifacts: Midden B
Zone

A

A-B

B

B-C

C

Surface

Total

1
1
2

1
2
4
6
5
1
5
1
1
5
1
1
22
1
2
3
2
3
4
4
3
2
1
1
6

Chipped Stone Artifacts
Dart Points
Bulverde, Variety I
Tortugas
Travis
Unclassified
Dart Point Fragments
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Form
Form
Form
Form
Form

I
2
I
4

3
1

I
3
5
8
19

1
2

2
1
4

Bifaee Form 20
Biface Blanks
Biface Fragments

I
1

1
3

10

1

1

2
1

2
2
1
I
1
I

Chopper Form 3
Uniface Form 2
Uniface Form 3

1

Uniface Form 4
Uniface Form 8
Burins
Gravers
Graver-Notches
Serrated Flakes
Core Form 1
Core Form 2
Core Residue

1

1
1
1

4

Miscellaneous Stone Artifacts
Scored Rock
Mano Form 1
Mano Form 2

Total

5
I

1
2
I
1
1
2

1
1
1

I
1
2
91

minor, found only at this predominantly Clear Fork midden. Non-projectile
point biface forms cannot definitely be attributed to the San Geronimo Phase
from this midden. Uniface Form 3 could possibly belong to the San Geronimo
Phase since it is found only at Middens B and C. Uniface Forms I and 6 are
found only at Midden C.
Little can be said about Midden D (Table 4). It may fall within the late Twin
Sisters Phase based on the single Frio dart point recovered from its shallow
sediment zone. However, a Frio-like form occurs in the San Geronimo
Phase. The biface forms found at Midden D are similar to those from Midden
C and the Uniface Forms were found at all middens.
Midden E (Table 5) is one of the most intact middens at Greenhaw. Four
zones were defined. Zone A underlies Zones B and C which are separated
horizontally rather than vertically. The primary artifacts of Zone A are
Bulverde (Variety II) and Travis dart points, Biface Form 2, and core residue.
Zone C is characterized by Bulverde (Variety II) and Travis dart points.
Bulverde (Variety II) is equally numerous as Travis.

Texas Archeological Society

48

o~

u~cO E
,~

~:~

’->

~

~ ~

-

ro

o~

~

~

~

~=.
~ ~

~

,~,~r~3r~G)~’~".~

_

~

~ ,’~

~

~

.~ .~__,

Weir- Greenhaw

0

D

DJ

r~

m

¯,-’~ C’q

m

o
N

o~
22 ~

ooooooo.~oo oo oo

49

50

Texas Archeological Society

D

©

o

©

~J

r~

r~

c~

0
m

r~
<

u
<

m
<

<

0
N

Weir- Greenhaw

q
o

r~
oq

<

<
m
<

<

m

b-

51

52

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4
Provenience of Artifacts: Midden D
Zone A

Surface

Total

Chipped Stone Artifacts
Dart Points

I
I

Buda
Frio
Nolan
Biface Form 3
Biface Form 5
Biface Form 7
Biface Fragments
Uniface Form 4
Uniface Form 8
Burin
Graver

I
2

Core Form 1
Core Form 3
Core Residue
Total

I
2
2
I
6
2
3
I
2
I
I
i

I
1
i
2
2
I
6
2
4
I
4
I
I
2
29

With the exception of Zone D, which is mostly alluvium and recent humus, the midden accumulation is attributed to late in the Clear Fork Phase.
Biface and Uniface forms from Midden E are more like those from Midden C,
although the variety is not as great.
Dart points found in Midden F (Table 6) are Pedernales (Varieties I, II, III,
and Miscellaneous), Bulverde (Varieties I and II), and several minor types.
Pedernales is the preponderant period marker. The midden probably began
accumulating late in the Clear Fork Phase but accelerated with particularly
intensive occupations during the Round Rock Phase.
Other artifacts from the midden are a Waco sinker, stemmed flakes, biface
forms, unifaces, drills, and cores. Biface Form 3 is the most numerous; how~
ever, this form is common at all middens. Biface Forms 2, 7, 12, and 19 are
significant; Forms 17 and 18 are found only at this predominantly Round
Rock midden, although they are minor. Uniface Forms 2, 4, 5, 7, and 8 are
found, with Uniface Form 4 the most common.
In Midden G (Table 7), the Nolan dart point is the dominant type while
Pedernales is the next most numerous. Pedernales points were primarily
found in the upper zones while Nolan points were from the lower zone. From
the small testing of Midden G, it appears to span the transition from the Clear
Fork Phase to the Round Rock Phase, with occasional occupation in the San
Marcos Phase.
Tortugas, believed to belong to both the San Geronimo Phase and the
Clear Fork Phase (Weir, 1976), is a major type at Midden C. Elsewhere, it
occurred only in Midden B. Travis is a major point type in Middens C and E,
but found only in the upper zone at Midden B. Nolan is a major type at
Midden C, the dominant type at Midden G, and a minor type at Midden E.
Bulverde (Variety I) is the dominant type at Midden C and a minor type at
Middens E and F. Bulverde (Variety II) is dominant at Midden E and a minor

Weir- Greenhaw

53

Table 5
Provenience of Artifacts: Midden E
Zone

A

A-B

A-C

B

B-C

C

C-D

D

C-

Pit Surf.

Total

Pit
Chipped Stone Artifacts
Arrowpoints
Arrowpoint Fragments
Dart Points
Angostura
Buda
Bulverde, Variety I

I
4

Fairland
Nolan, Variety I

I

I

I

1
3
2

2
I

1

Bulverde, Variety II

I

1

3

2

Pedernales, Variety II
Pedernales, Variety III

1
I

2

13
1

4

5
I
I
6
2

1
1

Pedernales, Misc.
Provisional Type III
Tortugas

1

I

5

I

2

I
I

Travis
Zorra

2
2

I

1
I

Unclassified
Dart Point Fragments

I
1

Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Form
Form
Form
Form

2
3
4
5

Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Form 7
Form 9
Form 19
Fragments

14

Perforators
Chopper Form 3
Chopper Form 5
Gouge Form 4

1

I

1
1

2
I
2

1

3
5

1
7

10
1
3

2

3
2
5
71
3
1
I

I
2

I

1
2
1

Adze
Uniface Form 3
Uniface Form 4
Uniface Form 8
Burins
Burin Spalls

3

4

3

6

6
I

1

3

I
11

1
2

2
18
2
I
1

I
1

2
I
i

I
2
1

1
I

I
1

1

1

2

5

2

1
2

4
1

Miscellaneous Stone Artifacts
Scored Rock
Mano Form 1

2

1

Mano Form 2
Milling Slabs

Total

1

3
4

I
I

I
I

5

!
I

Unclassified Ground Stone
Bone Artifacts
Bone Awl
Canine Tooth Bead

I

I
1
2
1

I

I
1

3
12
1
1

I

Gravers
Core Form I
Core Form 2
Core Residue
Chipped Pebble

I
7
3
5
8
4

i
14
I
2
1
3
2
1
1
1
219

Texas Archeological Society

54

Table 6
Provenience of Artifacts: Midden F
Zone

A A-B

A-C

B

B-C

B-D

C

C-D

D

D-E E Surf.

Total

Chipped Stone Artifacts
Dart Points
Bulverde, Variety I
Bulverde, Variety II
Edgewood
Gower, Variety II

1
1

1

I
i

1
2

I
I

I
I
I

i

Lange
Langtry
Marcos
Marshall
Pedernales, Variety I
Pedernales, Variety II
Pedernales, Variety III

2
2

2
1

Travis
Provisional Type VII

1
1
1

Unclassified Dart Points
Dart Point Fragments
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Form
Form
Form
Form
Form
Form
Form

1
2
3
4
6
7
8

Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Form
Form
Form
Form
Form
Form

10
11
12
16
17
18

Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Form 19
Form 20
Blanks
Fragments

I
2
I
I
3

I
1

2

4

I
1

I

5
2
I
I
2
3
1

1
1

I
1

1

3

1
I

3

1

2
2
4

I
I
3
3
2

2
1
1
I

1
1

Uniface Form 8
Burins
Burin Spalls
Gravers
Notches
Serrated Flakes
Core Form I
Core Form 2

1
I
2
2
2
1
2
I
I

I
1
2

1
11

1
2

4

12

12

6

1
1

I
13
2

1

Chopper Form 3
Chopper Form 5
Gouge Form 2
2
3
4
5
7

1

1
1
I

Perforators
Chopper Form 1
Chopper Form 2

Form
Form
Form
Form
Form

2
I
1

Pedernales, Misc.
Tortugas

Uniface
Uniface
Uniface
Uniface
Uniface

3

1
I

I
I

i
I
i

I
1

1

1

I
i
I
I
3
1

1
1

1

2

I

I
I

I
1
I

I

2
I
1
I
I

1
1
1
I
2

2

I

I

7
3
2
3
3
i
2
I

7
6
I
I
2
I
I
2
14
7
3
7
2
3
3
I
18
2
4
7
i
2
5
3
3
2
4
2
3
2
5
3
4
64
4
2
I
I
2
2
3
I
13
4
5
9
8
2
7
3
I
3
3

Weir- Greenhaw

Zone

A A-B A-C

B

B-C

1
2
1
1

Core Form 3
Core Residue
Stemmed Flakes
Hammerstones
Misc. Stone Artifacts
Scored Rock
Mano Form 1

B-D

C

I

1
3

Mano Form 2
Waco Sinkers

C-D

D

D-E

5

1
2

3

1
1

1

E Surf.

I

55

Total

I
8
i

4
28
2
I

1
2
2

4
4
2
1

Artifacts of Bone
Cut Bone

Total

317

type in Middens C and F. The Round Rock dart point type, Pedernales, is the
preponderant type at Midden F, occurs as a minor type in Middens C and G,
and is insignificant at Midden E.
These distributions indicate the site was first occupied during the early San
Geronimo Phase in the vicinity of Middens B and C (Fig. 20). Major Clear
Fork Phase occupations followed at Middens C, E, and G. Round Rock
Phase occupations, primarily at Midden F, ensued. The San Marcos Phase is
represented by a few dart points at Middens C, D, F, and G. The Twin Sisters
Phase and Neo-American stage are insignificantly represented.

CONCLUSIONS
The site in part substantiates the chronological periods outlined by Johnson et al. (1962) and the Phases of Weir (1976). The apparent favorable
location induced intermittent occupations from earliest Archaic to probably
Neo-American times.
At Greenhaw, unclassified dart point forms and Provisional Type I were
found in the lower zones of Middens B and C, below zones containing Nolan,
Travis, and Bulverde types.
Johnson et al. (1962:121) characterized the earliest of four Archaic periods by dart point types Nolan, Travis, and Bulverde. Since then, evidence
now suggests that these types were preceded by an even earlier Archaic.
At Youngsport, Shafer (1963: 79) found the Gower type stratigraphically
below Bulverde and Nolan. At Landslide, basally notched forms and unclassified forms (Sorrow et al., 1967), some of which resemble Provisional Types
I and II, were found below Bulverde-like and Travis points. At the Millican
Bench site (Weir, ms.), notched points were found stratigraphically below
Travis.
At La Jita, Hester (1971) found evidence of an early corner notched type.
Solberger and Hester (1972) presented the concept of the archaic-like PreArchaic manifestation at the Strohacker site. Weir (ms.) described a small
assemblage from a site near the settlement of San Geronimo, Texas, as being
part of a component that was earlier than the Early Archaic of Johnson et al.
(1962). These artifacts were included in the San Geronimo Phase (Weir,
1976).

Texas Archeological Society

56

Table 7
Provenience of Artifacts: Midden G
Zone

A

A-B

B

B-C

C

Surface

Total

Chipped Stone Artifacts
Dart Points
Castroville
Langtry
Marshall
Nolan, Variety I
Pedernales, Variety I
Pedernales, Variety II
Pedernales, Variety III
Pedernales, Misc.
Travis
Zorra
Unclassified Dart Point
Dart Point Fragments
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Form 2
Form 3
Form 4
Form 7
Form 11
Form 19
Blanks
Fragments

2
I
I
I

I

I
2

2
I
5
1
2

2

2
I
2

1
I

4

II
2
I
3
1
I
3
2

4

Perforators
Chopper Form 1
Chopper Form 3
Chopper Form 4

Uniface Form 8
Burins
Core Form I
Core Form 2

2
I

Core Form 3
Core Residue
Hammerstones

3
i
I

5

5
I
4
I

I

2

2
3

2

Chopper Form 5
Gouge Form 4
I

i
1

3
I

2

Uniface Form 4

I
1
i

2

I

Total

i
I

2
4

1

Misc. Stone Artifacts
Scored Rock
Mano Form I
Mano Form 2
Milling Slabs

i

3

I

5
2
3
I
I
2
1
2
1

I
I
1
3

2

I
6
4
1

15
3
5
1
9
I
7
I
18
2
5
I
I
2
I
3
I
4
7

3
3

5
7
8
1

4
2

6
2

2
1

2
I
148

As yet, there are insufficient dates to indicate the earliest occurrence of the
Archaic period in Texas. Certainly, its beginning precedes the time of Clear
Fork Phase by at least 3000 years (Weir, 1976).
The first major occupations at Greenhaw, attributable to the Clear Fork
Phase, are represented by major Biface Forms 1-8, 10, 19 and minor Forms 9
and 11-15, all uniface forms, and Travis, Nolan, Bulverde, and Tortugas
point types. The Tortugas type possibly indicates an early Clear Fork affilia-

Weir- Greenhaw

57

tion with the Archaic cultures of the semi-arid regions of South Texas. The
Bulverde type is the dominant form for these early occupations at Middens C
and E.
The most intensive occupation represented at Greenhaw is at Midden F,
largest of the nine middens. Assemblages from Midden F are dominated by
Round Rock Phase artifacts, including Pedernales dart points, Biface Forms
2, 3, 7, 12, 16-18, 19, and 20, and Uniface Forms 4, 5, 6, and 7. Perforators
are present, with a near absence of gouges. In contrast, gouges are important
at Midden C. Stemmed flakes were found only at Midden F.
Midden G appears to span the times of the Clear Fork, Round Rock, and
San Marcos Phases. The Clear Fork Phase is best represented at this midden.
The accumulation of cultural debris at the Greenhaw site first began very
early in the Archaic during the San Geronimo Phase and continued well into
the Clear Fork Phase when Bulverde was favored. The final extensive occupation was during the Round Rock Phase when Pedernales found greatest
popularity. The Round Rock Phase produced the largest of the middens,
possibly demonstrating the most intense period of site utilization.
At Greenhaw, there is a coevality of certain point types as indicated by the
horizontal distribution within and between middens. It is possible that there
were differing groups of people inhabiting the region at the same time (overlapping territories), each with their own favored styles of artifacts and occupying the same campsites at different times. This situation may have occurred
during the Clear Fork Phase more than during the Round Rock Phase, as the
ratter is typified by one dart point type rather than several (Weir, 1976).
The types of artifacts found and similar accumulation of cultural debris
indicate that there was little difference in the subsistence pattern between
Clear Fork and Round Rock Phases. However, the larger sites and middens
during the Round Rock Phase, and proliferation of the Pedernales dart point
style and its associated assemblages, could be an indication of increased populations or an amalgamation of different groups inhabiting Central Texas
(Weir, 1976).

4t HY29

INDICATOR

MIDDEN

DART

B

POINT

MIDDEN

C

DISTRIBUTION

MIDDEN

E

BY

MIDDEN

F

MIDDEN

MIDDEN

G

CML ~TE

Fig. 20 Horizontal distribution of significant projectile points from the Greenhaw site.

Texas Archeological Society

58

oo
..Q

m

’~,

m

~ "U~

~

c’

~

~

~

~

.2
o o ~ ~ o~ ~.c,~ ~ ~ ~

o

~ ~ ~-~->->-> ~ ~._~ g.o

Weir- Greenhaw

59

O4

O4

,-, ,"~ ’~J~ CO ¢q
O,ICq

¯ ~.~

~

~

~

00~ ~

~

~

~C

~
~0~> ~

~

000
~000
0~

Texas Archeological Society

60

0
F-

IliA ~a~V aa~ns
IIA ~a~v aa~JJns
IA ~a~V aa~}~ns
A ~a~v aa~Jn~
AI ~alv aachen9
III ~a~v aa~ns
"~

II ~a~v aa~ns

I ~a~V aae~n£

I uapp!Ki
14 uapp!IN
9 uapp!~l
=I uapp!K[
3 uapp!Ki
(3 uapp!~l
D uapP!IAI

uapp!bI
V uapp!lN

~c~

oooo’~oc

~EEEEEEEEEEEE

~oooooooo~ooooo
oooooooooo

oo

ooo

Weir - Greenhaw

61

oa

c-q t..~ r-~

o,i

oa

t--.
oa

vo

oa

,~ ,--~

62

Texas Archeological Society

*6
FIliA ~a~V aaej~ns

o3

IIA eaJV aa~.ins

IA ea~v aaej~ns

A ~a~v aae~Jns

AI ea~V aaeJ~ns

III ~alV aa~pns
II ~a~v aaepns

I easy aaepns

I uapP!IN

H uapp!!Al
O uapp!IN

:i uapP!IN

3 uapp!IN

G uapp!!Al
D uapP!l~

uapp!~

V uapP!l~

O0

~’~

o

~,~

~oo o~.= o °

o~

~

~

o

0

o~8

Weir- Greenhaw

63

The midden stone technology is revealing in that the manufacture of
chipped stone tools emphasized the production of biface over uniface tools.
Morphological variations noted in tools from different middens at Greenhaw
are probably indicative of different culture occupations. However, tool functions were probably the same through time.
Burned rock middens were the scene of many activities: various forms of
cooking (possibly including stone boiling), manufacture of artifacts, burials.
Living areas would occasionally be cleaned; the camp rubble and detritus
collected and dumped down slope from the ledges. This activity resulted in
midden accumulations much like the cultural talus deposits found in front of
once occupied West Texas rock shelters.
The intra-midden mounding of stones noted in Midden B and Midden G
could be interpreted as being one-time dumpings of camp refuse. Sorrow
(1969:46) and Hester (1970, 1971) discussed the dump theory as the cause
for burned rock midden accumulation. Although important, dumping was
not the only factor (Hester, 1971:125-126).
A most important cause in midden accretion was the use of stone in
processing food plants, as evidenced by ring middens of West Texas. Collins
(1972) reported a midden at Devil’s Hollow (Travis County) which appeared
to be a ring midden (a massive accumulation of burned rock with an apparent
large central pit or depression). While most ring middens date after the Round
Rock Phase, the Travis County midden contained Bulverde-like dart points
which are normally associated with the Clear Fork Phase.
As with later West Texas ring middens, the midden at Devil’s Hollow
(Collins, 1972) and Midden E at Greenhaw may be very early examples of
plant food processing stations. This situation raises speculation as to the origin
of ring and crescent middens, commonly found in West Texas and throughout the Southwest. It could be that the function of middens which began
initially in Central Texas, spread westward and was perpetuated in the west
long after its importance had ceased in Central Texas.
A characteristic of ring middens, however, is that they usually contain few
artifacts and are found infrequently in an extensively utilized habitation area.
Conversely, Central Texas mounded middens seldom show evidence of
large food preparation pits (time and erosion may account for this), usually
contain a large assortment of artifacts, and are almost always associated with
areas of village activity. The associated habitation areas may account for the
high incidence of artifacts and chipping debris in the middens. However,
artifact free Zone B of Midden F leaves the question of function open.
Keller (1976) suggested that Central Texas midden peripheries served as
focal points for lithic manufacturing. As middens grew in size, midden aggregations would cover initial chipping stations and create new chipping foci
around the ever-expanding peripheries. However, burned rock middens
were not formed in neat leayers. They accumulate by mounding of midden
debris one pile on top of or next to another. The complexity of these cultural
accretions is compounded by cultural and non-cultural disturbances in the
accumulations.
The presence of dart points in Central Texas sites, especially in the middens, is the strongest indicator of the importance of hunting. If burned rock
midden were animal as well as processing stations, projectile points (still attached to dart foreshafts) encountered during butchering would be discarded

64

Texas Archeological Society

on the midden hearth. The dart points could possibly serve as supplementary
butchering tools (a secondary use).
The importance of hunting (probably deer and small animais) probably
fluctuated with changes in the dependence on collecting. Determinations of
subsistence percentages was, however, made impossible by the poor state of
preservation of organic remains. The evidence for collecting is apparent in the
presence of turtle remains, rare occurence of mussel shells, and the burned
rock middens themselves.
The Greenhaw site demonstrates that most middens are not alike. Each
midden investigated proved unique, with its own variation in size and content
and representing different time periods. Greenhaw should provide a key in
the interpretations of the Central Texas Archaic. The burned rock middens
indicate that during the Clear Fork and Round Rock Phases, economic strategies were significantly different than during antecedent or subsequent phases.
Exactly what the economic adaptations were during the Clear Fork and
Round Rock Phases is not entirely known. The key is in the burned rock
middens.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This is a revised version of a master’s thesis titled "The Greenhaw Site: A Burned-Rock
Midden Cluster of the Edwards Plateau Aspect" (Weir, 1967). Neither the excavation of the
Greenhaw site nor the preparation of this report would have been possible without the courtesies
extended by the late John Greenhaw and the present land owners, Lonnie A. and Daphna
Farris. To them, I owe my wholehearted thanks. Also, special recognition is due those people
who offered their free time and labor in the excavation of the site: Ben R. Brown, Robert L.
Carlisle, John Clark, Michael B. Collins, John W. Greer, Lorraine Heartfield Green, Donny
Kolle, Roger and Val Nance, Ralph P. Mawyer Jr., Kent W. Mawyer, Claire Mawyer, Dianne
Morton, Mr. and Mrs. Bill Richmond, W. H. Sherer, Thad Sitton, and Gentry and Kay Steele.
To Leslie Von Rosenburg and, especially, Robert L. Carlisle, I would like to express my
thanks for their cooperation with my excavation procedures and for letting me have access to
their personal collections from the site. Advice and moral encouragement was provided by T. N.
Campbell, E. Mott Davis, Jeremiah F. Epstein, T. R. Hester, W. W. Newcomb, Dee Ann Story,
Michael B. Collins, Harry J. Shafer, Davis S. Dibble, and Curtis D. Tunnell.
An important job at any archeological site is mapping the area to be investigated. For an
excellent job at the Greenhaw site, I want to thank Preston Millican of the Lower Colorado River
Authority in Austin.
For cataloging and washing the artifacts, I would like to thank Donny Kolle, Frances Rosenberg Sorrow, and Ann Friedman. For analysis of the skeletal material, credit goes to Michael B.
Collins and Thomas S. Ellzey.
C. R. Thompson photographed the artifacts and R. Milton Bell aided in developing and
printing the plates of artifacts. Drafting was done by C. M. Landers and L. Wayne Belyeu.
Elizabeth L. Morris typed the manuscript.
And finally, whose patience and encouragement I could not have done without, I want to
thank my wife, Diane.

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Herbert
The Levi Site: A Paleo-lndian Campsite in Central Texas. American
1963
Antiquity, 28(4):510-528.
Alexander, Robert K.
Archeological Excavations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
1970
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 19:1-103.

Weir- Greenhaw

65

Collins, Michael B.
1962
The Devils Hollow Site, A Stratified Archaic Campsite in Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 43:77~100.
ms.

1963 Excavations at the Oblate Site. Manuscript on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.

Crawford, Daymond D.
1965

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 36:71-98.

Denton, Joe T.
1976
No Name Creek Site: A Terrace Site of the Middle and Late Archaic
Period in Gillespie County, Texas. State Department of Highways and
Public Transportations Publications in Archaeology, 7:1-44.
Dibble, David S.
1967

Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-1966. Report to the National Park
Service, Washington D.C.

Hester, Thomas R.
1966
Excavations at the Lackey Site: A Burned Rock Midden in Real County,
Texas. Manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.

1970

Burned Rock Midden Sites on the Southeastern Edge of the Edwards
Plateau, Texas. Plains Anthropologist, 15:237-250.

1971

Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 42:51-148.

Hester, Thomas R. and Harvey Kohnitz
1975
Chronological Placement of Guadalupe Tools. La Tierra, 2(2):22-25.
House, J. W. and Thomas R. Hester
1963
The Carrizo Point. Carrizo Springs High School Archeological Society
Special Publication, Carrizo Springs, Texas.
Jackson, A. T. and Arthur M. Woolsey
1938
Annual Report of WPA and the University of Texas Archaeological Research, Lake Buchanan, 1936~1937. University of Texas Publications,
3802:1-153.
Jelks, Edward B.
1951
Relationships Between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect: A Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic Projectile Point Types from Archaeological
Sites in the Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County, Texas. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
1964
The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. University of Texas, Department of Anthropofogy, Archeology Series, 6:1-115.
1967

Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central and
Southwest Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum, 12:1-110.

Keller, John Esten
1976

The Strickleaf Site. State Department of Highways and Public Transportation Publications in Archaeology, 8:1-43.

66

Texas Archeological Society

Kelley, J. Charles
1947a The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 18:115-128.
1947b

The Cultural Affiliation and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. American Antiquity, 13(2):97-108.

1959

The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase. Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity, 24(3):276-288.

Kelly, Thomas C.
The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midden, Travis County,
1960
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 31:238-272.
Nunley, John P.
1963
The J. P. Schneider Site: A Central Texas Burned Rock Midden. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Olds, Dorris L.
Report on Materials from Brawley’s Cave, Bosque County, Texas. Bul1965
letin of the Texas Archeological Society, 36:111-144.
Pearce, J. E.
The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo1932
logical and Paleontological Society, 4:44-54.
Prewitt, Elton R.
A Preliminary Report on the Devils Rockshelter Site, Val Verde County,
1966
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, 18(2):206-224.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938
The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, 10:193-207.

1948

The Facts Concerning the Clear Fork Culture. American Antiquity,
13(4) :320-322.

Sayles, E. B.
1935
An Archeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, 17:1-164.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 34:57-81.

1967

An Archeological Survey of Robert Lee Reservoir, Coke County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports, 4:1-77.

1969

Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin, West
Central Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 17:198.

Sharer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. Dan Scurlock
1964
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Miscellaneous Papers, I: 1-113.
Sollberger, J. B. and Thomas Roy Hester
1972
The Strohocker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in Texas.
Plains Anthropologist, 17:326-344.

Weir- Greenhaw

67

Sorrow, William M.
1969
Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burnt Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, 11:1-148.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955
Excavation at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, 26:7-54.

1959

The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. Texas Journal of
Science, 11(2):218-250.

1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 29:63-107.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 25:1-562.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1964
University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates II. Radiocarbon, 6:138-159.

Valastro, S. Jr., F. J. Pearson Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1967
University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates V. Radiocarbon, 9:439-453.
Valastro, S. Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Craig T. Rightmire
1968
University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates VI. Radiocarbon, 10:384-401.
WaR, Frank H.
1938
The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist, 4:11-70.
Weir, Frank A,
1967
The Greenhaw Site: A Burned-Rock Midden Cluster of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
1976a

1976b

The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In: T. R. Hester (ed.), The
Texas Archaic: A Symposium. University of Texas at San Antonio. Center for Archaeological Research, Special Report, 2:60-66.
The

Central

Texas

Archaic.

Unpublished

Ph.D.

dissertation,

Washington State University, Pullman.
ms.

The San Geronimo Site. Manuscript on file at the State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Word, James H. and Charles L. Douglas
1970

Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Memorial Museum, 16:1-151.

ABSTRACT
The Old Tom Burial (41DK16) is a prehistoric slab lined interment with associated offerings, located in southwest Dickens County, Texas. It cannot as yet be
associated with any defined archeological or cultural unit. However, the site has
considerable significance because associated artifacts reveal something of funerary
customs, trade routes, and other aspects. This paper attempts a detailed description and interpretation of the burial and its contents.

INTRODUCTION
The Old Tom Burial was discovered in 1969 by Hill and Martin (Hill, ms.)
While surface collecting, they observed a heavy conchshell pendant (Fig. 1)
eroding from the surface at the crest of a hill. The hill overlooks the central
portion of the valley formed by Red Mud Creek. A tributary of the White
River, the creek drains parts of Dickens and Kent counties (Texas). A Harrell
point (Fig. 2a) lay near the pendant. These finds were within an enclosure
formed by exposed upper edges of vertically placed sandstone slabs.
Slab lined pits containing human skeletal remains are a common type of
prehistoric burial in the area. The subsequent excavation was careful but not
scientifically recorded. At a later date, Hill (ms.), recognizing the importance
of the find, made notes of the details of the excavation as remembered. These
notes and artifacts are the basis of this paper.

ENVIRONMENT
Red Mud Creek derives its name from the extensive exposure of Permain
redbeds in its drainage area. These formations are made up largely of red
clays with frequently occurring layers of gypsum. The Old Tom Burial Iocation is situated on a prominence which represents the point of a highland
between Red Mud Creek and a tributary. It lies about 1/2 mile west of the
present stream course.
This elevation has been protected somewhat from erosional degradation
by a cap of sandstone, probably of Triassic age (John Brand, personal communication). A scattered deposit of stream-rolled gravel, consisting of a broad
range of igneous stone, occurs on the surface of the hill top.
A slight saddleback, formed by erosional isolation of the hill top, separates
the point from the main body of the upland. Today, the immediate area is
very sparsely vegetated, low shrubs and tufts of grass being the predominant
plants. On the terraces between the site and stream beds, mesquite, prickly
pear, and grasses prevail. Along the creek, tributary channels, and draws,

70

Texas Archeological Society

cottonwoods, hackberries, and wild plums are found. Thick stands of shin
oak occur in a dune area a few miles to the west.
The nearest presently reliable source of water is in a bend of Red Mud
Creek about 3/4 mile to the southeast. This bend turns against the base of a
steep Permian bluff. The bed of the creek has been deepened, presumably by
water turbulence in flood time. Water is found in this depression in all but the
very driest seasons.
Terraces in the immediate vicinity of the waterhole show considerable
evidences of prehistoric occupation. Several burials were removed from the
bluff tops and surrounding hills.

ARCHEOLOGICALBACKGROUND
The Old Tom Burial site lies near the center of the Panhandle-Plains
region (Suhm et al., 1954), one of the least studied’archeological areas of
Texas. Works such as Kelley (1964), Collins (1971), Tunnell (1977), and
Hughes and Willey (1978) give excellent general summaries of regional prehistory. Other reports include Harrison and Killen (1978), Black (1974),
Johnson et al. (1977), Sellards et al. (1947), Ray (1938), Tunnell and
Hughes (1955), Hughes (1955), Word (1963, 1965), Runkles (1964), and
Parsons (1967).
Of particular relevance to this study are reports of burial excavations.
Amongst reports directly pertinent are Holden (1929), Cochrum (1963), and
Ray (1936). Other reports of interest include Tunnell (1964), Witte (1955),
Quinn and Holden (1949), Harrison and Griffin (1973), Jokerst (1972),
Shawn (1973) and Ray (1933, 1934, 1935, 1936, 1939, 1940, 1943,
1946).
Carefully excavated and reported burials are outnumbered a hundredfold
by those which are carelessly excavated and unreported. Digging of graves
has been a major focus of non-professional archeologists and hobbists in the
region. This practice has been facilitated by the custom of at least some of the
prehistoric residents of marking or protecting their interments with certain
arrangements of stones.
Some individuals have taken advantage of these tell-tale evidences and
have located and excavated many prehistoric burials. Much information
about the prehistory of the area was destroyed in this manner; but some data
can be gleaned from artifact collections and oral reports of these persons.
In this report, generalizations were extracted from personal observations
of the authors and conversations with individuals who have made a practice
of excavating burials when they find them. These generalizations can best be
applied to the area of Dickens, Kent, Crosby, and Garza counties. Types of
prehistoric burials probably occurred that were not marked by stones and
consequently seldom have been discovered.
Most burials excavated in the area were from hills and bluffs overlooking
stream drainages. They may or may not be located on habitation sites. There
is no evidence as yet that those that are located on habitation sites are necessarily associated with them.
Graves are usually either slablined cists or covered by slabs and/or cobbles. Usually, the cists, or stone boxes, are small, less than a meter in diame-

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

71

ter. Some graves are both slab lined and covered with stones. Cairns over
graves may be two to three meters or more in diameter. Many burials are
reported to have an especially large stone covering the upper portion of the
body. Skeletons are commonly tightly flexed and often incomplete.
Burial furniture is very rare. Informant estimates of frequency of burials
with associations range from one in fifty to one in a hundred. The most
common association seems to be unmodified mussel shells. They are often
placed with concave surfaces up as if to serve as a container.
Items of personal adornment, such as Olivella shell, bone, or crinoid stem
beads, are occasionally found with burials in this area. A few, like the Old
Tom Burial, contain shell pendants or atlatl weights. Other associations reported include large, finely chipped bifaces of Edwards Formation chert, projectile points, preforms, and bone awls.

THE SITE
The prominence upon which the Old Tom Burial was located offers a
broad view from the west of the middle drainage of Red Mud Creek. It is an
ideal position for either a tactical or spiritual lookout. Evidence of human
activities at the spot, in addition to the burial, consisted of: a very sparse lithic
scatter, apparently the product of sampling of gravel deposits as a possible
source of flaking materials; and one or two tool fragments, most notable of
which is the distal end of a snubnosed end scraper.
This material indicates that the location was not used extensively for any
activity which would produce quantities of lithic detritus. There is no evidence
to connect the activities with the Old Tom Burial.

THE BURIAL
The Old Tom Burial pit was excavated through the fragmented Triassic
sandstone and into the underlying red clay Permian formation. The pit, about
60 cm in diameter and depth, was lined by sandstone slabs gathered on the
site. The mouth was effectively sealed by a layer of horizontally arranged
slabs. This plug was removed and approximately an additional 15 cm of red
clay fill was excavated before skeletal material and artifacts were encountered.
Near the center of the pit floor, a small portion of a human skeleton was
found. Four artifacts, three conch shell pendants and a polished stone object
(probably an atlatl weight) were leaning against the slab walls, at approximate
cardinal directions. The latter (Fig. 1) was standing on end at approximate
south, while the pendants were sitting on their broader ends; Specimen 1
(Fig. 3) was to the east, Specimen 2 (Fig. 4) to the north, and Specimen 3
(Fig. 5) to the west. Reported from the backdirt, but lost, was a shell bead of
the Olivella type.
Skeletal material from the Old Tom Burial represents only a small portion
of the individual. Preservation of these elements was extremely poor, probably indicating scattering and exposure of the bones prior to interment. Preliminary analysis concluded that the bones represent those of an adult individual, age and sex unknown.

72

Texas Archeological Society

Skeletal elements present were: two fragments of the proximal end of a
tibia (probably right); one mid-portion of the right femoral shaft; one midportion and part of the distal end of the right humerus; and two small fragments that are probably ribs. The femur shows a curvature greater than normal; this may indicate a disease or be evidence of malnutrition at a pre-adult
age. The humerus appears to have lesions which may indicate disease,

THE ARTIFACTS
HARRELL POINT (Fig. 2a). A small side and basally notched triangular arrow point was
found on the surface within the circle of slabs. This specimen is of Edwards Formation chert
(glossy, light grey tan). A small portion of the distal tip and one basal corner are missing. Dimensions are: estimated maximum length 18.5 mm; estimated maximum width 17.0 mm; maximum
thickness 3.1 mm; width of notches 2.0 and 2.7 mm; width of point between side notches
(approximate diameter of distal end of arrow shaft) 9.0 mm.
ATLATL WEIGHT (Fig. 2b). A polished stone object having a plano-convex outline and a
narrow, triangular cross section was found standing on one end and leaning against the south
wall of the slab lined pit. Twenty six notches were cut into the curved, thinner edge of the artifact.
These probably were produced by application from each side of a thin, rounded-edged sandstone hone or abrader. Short grooves extend down the faces from each notch.
One notch, just off-center, is slightly larger than the others. The specimen is 180.0 mm wide
at maximum width, has a maximum thickness of 11.8 mm, and weighs 145.9 gr. A few striations
left by the grinding process are visible, running in various directions on the surface.
This specimen exhibits a high glossy polish on all surfaces (except in the notches). It is made
from a dark green stone which was identified (John Brand, personal communication) as probably
Gomez rhyolite, originating in the northern Davis Mountains of western Texas. Identification was
by microscopic examination of the surface of the artifact; a thin section was not made.
SHELL PENDANTS. Four pendants, cut from the outer whorl of large conch shells, were
found associated with the Old Tom Burial. Three were sealed in the grave by a plug of sandstone
slabs. Their positions, each standing on their broad base and leaning against the slab wall,
indicate that they were not significantly moved since the time of interment. The fourth, Specimen

0

I

2

3

cnq

Fig. 2 Stone artifacts from Old Torn Burial: a) Harrell poim ~
b) cariniforrn atlatl weight (3/4 actual size).

Parsons, Hill, Parker -- Old Tom Burial

73

4, differs somewhat from the others. Its placement on the surface indicates that it was deposited
after the grave was sealed, at the end of the burial rite or at some later date. Despite its surface
provenience, the association of this pendant with the burial can hardly be fortuitous, given the
extreme rarity of this type of artifact in the region.
SPECIMEN 1 (Fig. 3). This artifact, found leaning against the eastern wall of the burial pit, is
roughly triangular in outline, 74.6 mm in length, 56.1 mm wide at the base, and ranges in
thickness from 2.2 to 4.7 mm. Five holes, ranging in diameter from 2.4 to 3.4 mm were drilled
biconically along the approximate midline of the pendant. The uppermost hole was broken out to
the edge, perhaps due to wear. The hole immediately below probably was subsequently drilled as
a replacement.

Fig. 1 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 4 (actual size).

74

Texas Archeological Society

This uppermost intact perforation does not show elongation due to wear, as do suspension
holes on some of the other pendants. Near the center of the pendant, on its inner or concave
face, and along the same midline occupied by the perforations, five drilled depressions, about
1.5-2.0 mm in diameter, persumably decorative in intent, are arranged. All edges and surfaces
are ground smooth.
SPECIMEN 2 (Fig. 4). The pendant found against the north wall is the largest of the three
included in the burial pit. Its outline is roughly that of a truncated isosceles triangle. Maximum
length is 89.2 mm and maximum width 82.4 mm. It is, overall, a heavier piece of shell than
Specimen 1, with thickness ranging from 2.7 to 3.7 mm.
Near the upper edge of the artifact, a hole, 3.3 mm in diameter, was biconically drilled. The
shell is worn thin between this perforation and the upper edge of the artifacL It is somewhat
elongated, apparently from long suspension by a cord or thong. The pendant probably was
allowed to slide freely on the thong, rather than being secured by a knot or loop as were conch
pendants found in a burial bundle from Coahuila (Taylor, 1968:Fig. 6).
Along the lower, broader edge of the specimen, an additional six holes, ranging in diameter
from 2.2 to 2.7 mm, were biconically drilled. These holes probably were for suspension of
additional decorative elements, perhaps feathers or beads. Two holes are broken out to the lower
edge. The concave face is decorated by two double rows of drilled pits. One row is immediately
above and parallel to the line of holes along the basal edge. The other row bisects the lower half of
the specimen, meeting the first row at right angles and forming an inverted T design. Diameters of
the decorative depressions range from 1.0 to 1.4 mm. All surfaces and edges are well polished.
SPECIMEN 3 (Fig. 5). The third pendant, found against the west wall of the pit, is subrectangular in outline, 77.2 mm long and 50.3 mm wide. Thickness ranges from 2.9 to 4.7 mm.
A few tiny notches are barely visible along one lateral edge. A biconically drilled suspension hole
(3".6 × 4.8 mm)> somewhat elongated by wear, occurs near the center of the upper edge of the
specimen. A second perforation, also biconically drilled, is similarly placed near the lower edge.
Three closely spaced lines of drilled depressions (1.8-2.1 mm in diameter) decorate the
lower edge of the concave face of the specimen. A single line of like depressions are along a
portion of one lateral edge. A concavity in the edge of the pendant (which may represent half of a
former suspension hole) is immediately above this feature.
Specimen 3 was apparently recycled from a broken larger pendant; or, two small ones were
made from a large one by cutting a vertical, bisecting line through a central suspension hole and
an inverted T design of drilled pits similar to that seen on Specimen 2.

Fig. 3 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 1 (actual size).

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

75

SPECIMEN 4 (Fig. 1). The pendant found on the surface differs somewhat from those found
in the burial pit. Its breadth (horizontal dimension as suspended) is greater than its length (vertical
dimension). It is made of a heavier material and has a metallic ring when struck, as if fossilized. A
drilled decoration does not occur on Specimen 4.
Two biconically drilled suspension holes occur, one at each upper corner of the pendant
(one has broken out), rather than one near the upper center of the pendant, as in Specimens i,
2, and 3. Specimen 4 metric data are: maximum vertical dimension 72.5 mm; maximum width
(at base) 96.1 mm; thickness range 2.5 to 10.2 mm; diameters of suspension holes 5.2 and 5.5
mm.
SHELL BEAD. During a follow up visit some time after excavation, a shell bead, reported to
be of the Olivella type, was recovered from the backdirt. This specimen was lost and unavailable
for study.

0

Fig. 4 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 2 (actual size).

76

Texas Archeological Society

COMPARATIVE MATERIALS
HARRELL POINT. This point represents one of the most common forms
of late Prehistoric -- early Historic arrow points found in the PanhandlePlains region of Texas. Amongst sites in the vicinity where Harrell points are
prominent in the assemblage are Pete Creek (Parsons, 1967), Garza
(Runkles, 1964), Montgomery (Word, 1965), and Floydada Country Club
(Word, 1963).
ALTATL WEIGHT. A few objects similar to the polished stone artifact
found with the Old Tom Burial were recovered from burials and surface sites
in an area extending from Briscoe County south to Mitchell County. A concentration area apparently occurs near the center of this range, in Garza,
Crosby, Kent, and Dickens counties. One outlying specimen is reported from
Jeff Davis County, Texas (Parsons, ms.). Two of these artifacts are reported
in Ray (1936:Fig. 1, 20, 21)~ one in Holden (1929:32-33)~ and a third in
Cochrum (1963).
Parsons (1960) tentatively identified these artifacts as atlatl, or spearthrower, weights. He demonstrated with a model how they might have been
bound to a spear-thrower. Parsons (1960) referred to the artifact type as
lunates, in reference to their near crescentic form.
This term was not the wisest choice. It does not accurately describe the
form of this artifact type. The term was used to designate various other crescentic artifact forms around the world. Furthermore, it was more appropriately applied to certain other atlatl weight forms, most notably the cresentic
or pick-shaped bannerstones of the eastern United States. Consequently,
Parsons (ms.) is proposing an alternate name, that of cariniform atlatl
weights. This term refers to the keel-like morphology of this artifact form.

Fig, 5 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 3 (actual size).

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

77

Parsons (ms.) gives a detailed description of all known cariniform atlatl
weights and their archeological contexts. A brief summary of the characteristics of this form is presented for comparative purposes. Ten specimens are
known from nine sites, two of which are surface localities and the remainder
burials. Four specimens are made of green stone which was identified as
rhyolite, probably from the Davis Mountains (John Brand, personal communication; David Mattison, personal communication), and another of greygreen diorite, probably from New Mexico (Cochrum, 1963).
One is of a white stone, possibly limestone; and one is of a fine grained,
mottled brown siltstone. Three are of unidentified materials, two of them
green, the other reportedly white. All are very similar in form.
Some specimens have a larger central notch on the curved edge than the
one from the Old Tom Burial. The Old Tom Burial specimen, at 18 cm, is at
the larger end of the size range; length of the smaller specimens is about 9-10
cm. One small fragment, found on a surface site in Garza County, is distinguished by grooves being cut into both faces from each dorsal notch to the
base, producing a rippled or corrugated effect.
Cariniform atlatl weights are found in a rather wide variety of archeological contexts (Parsons, ms.). One specimen was found on the surface of a site
producing only dart points (Fairy McWilliams, personal communication);
another on a site yielding only arrow points (Emmett Shedd, personal communication). Four, including the Old Tom Burial, were found in slab lined
burials; one in a slab covered inhumation (Cochrum, 1963); one from an
historic cavern burial (Parsons, ms.); and two from a slab covered crematorium (Ray, 1936).
Associated artifacts occur in all but one of the burial sites. Only one produced items which might be useful in dating the form. Three dart points (two
corner notched and one side notched) were found with a cremation (Ray,
1936).
Of four burials where reliable examinations were made of skeletal material
associated with cariniform atlatl weights, two were children (Ray, 1936;
Cochrum, 1963), one was an adult male (Holden, 1929), and the fourth, the
Old Tom Burial, was an adult of unknown sex.
SHELL PENDANTS. Conch shell ornaments with drilled designs on their
concave faces are reported from a few Texas coastal sites. Campbell (1957)
described a circular conch ornament with drilled design from the Caplen site
in Galveston County. A pendant with two intersecting double rows of drilled
pits was found at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery and a similar one
from the Galina Park site (Aten et al., 1976:Fig. 15). A conch pendant with
five drilled pits in a horizontal line was recovered from a burial at Shell Point
(Hole and Wilkinson, 1973:Fig. 9F).
A short distance from the coast, at the Ernest Witte site (41AU36), two
pendants bearing decorative elements of drilled pits were found (Hall,
1977:Fig. 36, form 7). One of these bears an inverted T design virtually
identical with that seen on Old Tom Burial Specimen 2. However, the Ernest
Witte site pendants are somewhat larger and lack perforations along the
broader end. Uncorrected radiocarbon assays from the group of burials which
produced these pendants indicate an age between 2460 + 70 B.P. (TX2451) and 1650 + 70 B.P. (TX-2452) (Hall, 1977:77).

78

Texas Archeological Society

Further inland, a small fragment of a conch shell artifact with drilled orna~
mental pits was reported from the Loeve-Fox site, Williamson County (Prewitt, 1974:113). Prewitt (1974) also reported decorated conch shell pendants
from the nearby Camp site (41MM19).
Forrester (1951:Fig. 5A~C) recovered a conch shell pendant very similar
in form to the Old Tom Burial specimens from a cemetery in Shackelford
County. Another grave in the same group had a mussel shell pendant of
similar form and size with what appears in the illustration to be drilled decoration, although treatment is not described in the text.
Some conch shell pendants with drilled design were found in areas far
removed from coastal waters. One fragment from Garza County is in the
Emmett Shedd collection (Post, Texas). Another such pendant is reported by
Kidder (1932:Fig. 165) from a deep crack in the limestone cliff near the
modern town of Pecos, New Mexico (Kidder, 1932:194). The latter had an
incised human figure as well as drilled pits decorating its concave face.
A series of photographs were found in the files of The Museum of Texas
Tech University. One illustrates a shell pendant very similar in form to the Old
Tom Burial specimens. This artifact was decorated with an elaborated version
of the inverted T design. The version consists of three vertical and three
horizontal lines of closely spaced drilled pits outlined by a line of larger, more
widely spaced depressions. The owner of this specimen comes from Dickens
County; neither provenience nor associational data are preserved with the
photographs.

INTERPRETATION
The Old Tom Burial is isolated from other remains of the culture that
produced it. Deductions must be based on the grave and its contents, with
some help from the study of other interments which produced stylistically
similar associations.
Materials that can be reliably dated by radiocarbon were not present in the
Old Tom Burial (quantity of skeletal material was insufficient for this purpose). Chronological estimates are based on burial associations. There is
limited temporal data available about both artifact forms found enclosed in the
grave.
Atlatl weights are usually considered hallmarks of the Archaic period.
Earliest examples in America come from the proto-Archaic, perhaps 70008000 B.P. (Hester, 1974:2; Coe, 1964; Chapman, 1975: 200). They seem
most common in Late Archaic contexts, but also were found in Woodland
sites (Neuman, 1967:51).
Despite the arrival of the bow and arrow in most areas of North America
before A.D. 1000, there are several instances of the survival of the atlatl,
perhaps for specialized purposes, into the historic era (Krieger, 1956; Nuttal,
1891; Kellar, 1955:284,286). Consequently, on the basis of the presence of
an atlatl weight alone, the burial cannot be consigned to the Archaic period.
Such objects may have passed down through subsequent generations; or
they may have been lost and recovered by later inhabitants.
The cariniform atlatl weight from the Old Tom Burial is one of several

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

79

found in burials of the region (Parsons, ms.). One of these burials, reported by
Ray (1936), contained three dart points, in addition to two cariniform atlatl
weights and a number of other artifacts. These specimens were examined,
illustrated, and described in Parsons (ms.).
One of the points (Ray, 1936:PI. 1, No. 11) is lanceolate in outline, with
broad side notches and a slightly concave base. Its length is 43.6 mm. Two
others (Ray, 1936: PI. I, No. 10 and 12) are triangular in outline, with narrow, oblique notches at the basal corners that form long barbs, and have small
expanding stems. Their lengths are 45.0 mm (estimated due to breakage)
and 57.4 mm. The side notched specimen probably can be called an Ensor
point, a Late Archaic type. The corner notched points resemble several
morphologically similar Late Archaic forms, such as Castroville, Marcos, and
Marshall.
The occurrence of Late Archaic dart points in another grave cannot date
the Old Tom Burial, but the occurrence of cariniform atlatl weights in both
interments suggest that the two may be contemporaneous. It seems safe to
say that this atlatl weight form was being made during Late Archaic times.
Expectably, stylistic analysis and dating of conch shell pendants is not as
advanced as it is in the case of projectile points. However, there are a few
examples of conch shell pendants with drilled pit decoration from sites that
have been radiocarbon dated. Aten et al. (1971:12) report such a pendant
from a burial at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery, a site which produced dates ranging from 3670 + 80 B.P. (TX-969) to 1500 + 70 B.P. (TX968B).
Ring (1960:317-18) reported dates of 1900 + 105 B.P. (0-911) and
3350 + 115 B.P. (0-912) from Galena Park, where a similar pendant was
found. The Ernest Witte site component, which produced the closest dated
cognates of the Old Tom Specimens, yielded dates of 2460 + 70 B.P. (TX2451) and 1650 _+_+ 70 B.P. (TX-2452) (Hall, 1977:77). These dates again
are not conclusive, but are suggestive of a Late Archaic age for the conch shell
pendants in the Old Tom Burial.
The Harrell point is of interest in discussion of the dating of the Old Tom
Burial. Because this late form is not consistent with an Archaic date for the
burial, it is tempting to dismiss it as a fortuitous association. However, as there
are few artifacts on the hilltop where the burial was located, its dismissal would
perhaps attribute too much to chance.
One possibility, if the Harrell point is not a coincidental association, is that
all artifacts from the Old Tom Burial are contemporaneous. This situation
could be explained by the survival of cariniform atlatl weights as charms,
fetishes, or keepsakes beyond the actual use of the atlatl, as suggested by
Patterson (1937:71-72).
Conversely, the atlatl may have been used along with the bow and arrow.
Perhaps specialized purposes included water bird procurement, as by the
historic Indians of Lake Patzucaro, Michoacan, Mexico (Harrington,
1933:89-92); or fishing, as may have been the case among historic Gulf
coastal tribes (Krieger, 1956:205). Cariniform atlatl weights were found in a
burial on a late occupation site (Cochrum, 1963) and on the surface of a site
where only arrow points were found (Emmett Shedd, personal communication; Parsons, ms.).
The more likely probability seems to be that the arrow point was deposited

80

Texas Archeological Society

on the grave surface at a much later date, either intentionally or by chance.
However, the close match between the surface conch shell pendant and
those within the grave is strong evidence that the person placing the surface
pendant knew of the grave’s contents. This deposition probably happened
soon after interment; but it is conceivable that considerable time might have
passed before oral tradition of the grave’s contents was lost.
Most evidence points toward a Late Archaic date, perhaps 1500-3000
B.P., for the Old Tom Burial. The possibility exists, with some supportive
evidence, that it might fall in the later Neo-American stage.
Funerary Customs
The fragmentary nature of the skeletal material from the Old Tom Burial
suggests that it represents a secondary, or bundle burial, similar to those
produced by the custom practiced on the Plains in historic times. In this practice, the corpse was exposed to the elements, often on a platform, until the
soft parts had decayed, and the remaining bones were subsequently buried
(Bushnell, 1927).
Four of the burials which yielded cariniform atlatl weights contained complete skeletons in flexed positions. One was a cremation. These means of
disposal of the dead may have occurred more commonly than bundle burial.
Lining or covering (or both) of the burial pit with stone slabs is a trait
associated with six of the seven burials that yielded cariniform atlatl weights
(Parsons, ms.). This situation indicates that the practice was an integral part of
burial custom. The placement of grave offerings in a few, but not most, slab
lined graves in the area might be taken to indicate a degree of social stratification.
Two of these burials, however, were those of small children. Social status
was probably not the criterion which determined placement of funeral offerings. Burial furniture was not solely personal property of the deceased, as
small children would be unlikely to possess atlatls or weights.
Many associations were art objects of exotic materials, suggesting that
offerings were of a sacrificial nature. Items of special value may have been
given up as an expression of grief. Of seven graves with atlatl weights, six
contained other non-perishable artifacts. When offerings were made, they
were often multiple. It is likely that many graves contained perishable items
which were not preserved.
The placement of atlatl weights with interments presents an interesting
parallel with custom across large portions of the North American continent
(Parsons, ms.). In some southeastern sites (Webb, 1946~ Webb and Haag,
1940; Webb and Dejarnette, 1942), atlatls, usually thought of as part of male
paraphennalia for hunting and warfare, often were associated with burials of
women and children (Webb, 1946:330).
Trade
Of importance are implications regarding trade of the artifacts contained
in the Old Tom Burial. The atlatl weight is of an igneous stone not native to the
area. It was tentatively identified as Gomez rhyolite, from the northern Davis
Mountain in the Big Bend region of Texas. This area is some 250 miles to the
southwest.

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

81

Of the 10 known cariniform atlatl weights, six are of green igneous stones.
The preference for stone of this color, despite the difficulty of obtaining and
with the atlatl. Blue was connected with atlatls in the Aztec culture (Nuttal,
1891:20-23; Parsons, ms.).
The conch shell pendants must have come to West Texas via a separate
trade route, perhaps up the Brazos River from the Gulf of Mexico. If obtained
directly from the coast, this would have involved a trip of over 600 miles each
way. These objects may, however, have changed hands several times along
this route. Several pendants similar to the Old Tom Burial specimens were
found in graves on the Texas coast and in areas intermediate between the
coast and the site.

Technology
Parsons (ms.) predicted that the form of the atlatl with which the cariniform weight was used can be surmised to a limited extent from the shape of
the weight itself. The base of the type is quite narrow compared to other atlatl
weight forms which were bound to the shaft, e.g., boatstones (Patterson,
1937) and bar weights (Webb, 1946; Dalley and Peterson, 1970).
Parsons (ms.) suggested that the cariniform weights would have been
more suitable for binding to narrow, rod shaped atlatls as opposed to the
broad, flat, board shaped atlatl more common to the southwest (Kellar,
1955:303). Examples of the former type include the Shumla, Texas example
(Gardner and Martin, ms.), the Ozark Bluff Dweller specimen (Harrington,
1924), and the Lake Winnemucca atlatl (Hester, 1974). Furthermore, Parsons (ms.) believed that the most efficient manner of binding a cariniform
weight to an atlatl shaft would have required a broad notch on the face of the
spear thrower opposite the weight.
The atlatl weights were probably produced by a pecking and grinding
technique. Notches along the convex edges of these specimens were possibly
made by the use of narrow edged sandstone hones.
Recycling of conch shell pendants was apparently practiced, as evidenced
by the bisected suspension hole and design on Specimen 3. Wear of suspension holes indicate that pendants were allowed to slide freely on the supporting thongs or cords.

Psychology
Not much can be said about how these people made and used their tools,
or how and when they lived. But the Old Tom Burial, like a time capsule,
carries a number of messages about subtler aspects of their lives.
Certainly, these people held their dead in great respect. The site was
carefully selected, the pit securely lined and sealed with stone. Precious objects were placed, with every appearance of reverence, propped against the
walls of the grave. The spacing of the four burial offerings at the approximate
cardinal directions may be coincidental; but the careful placement of the objects implies ritualistic behavior.
The atlatl weight and shell pendants demonstrate that value was placed
on the exotic. The shell pendants, in form and decoration, show a regard for

82

Texas Archeological Society

symmetry, as perhaps does the spacing of the artifacts in the burial pit. Gloss
and color were of prime concern to the makers of the cariniform atlatl weights.
The artifacts, in addition to being valuable due to their qualities of rarity
and beauty, may have had qualities of sacredness. Both the atlatl (Nuttal,
1891) and shell (Kidder, 1932:194) do in other places. A high regard for
conch shell pendants can be surmised from the worn suspension holes (indicating long use) and apparent recycling of one specimen.
Two cariniform atlatl weights were found with small children, This group
may have had the concept of sacrifice of valued personal possessions as an
expression of grief. Placement of such objects in a child’s grave would seem to
imply that children were held in high regard in the society.

SUMMARY
The Old Tom Burial reveals limited data about certain aspects of the lives
of an unidentified people of prehistoric western Texas. They produced slab
lined interments which were sometimes bundle burials or cremations, but
more often contained tightly flexed primary inhumations. Burial furniture was
sometimes included.
The Old Tom Burial contained an atlatl weight of distinctive form and
three conch shell pendants. These offerings may have been sacrificial in nature, rather than being personal possessions of the deceased. Dates for similar
objects in other areas of Texas tentatively place the burial in the Late Archaic
period. Direct or indirect trade routes may have been established to the Big
Bend and coastal areas of Texas. Esthetics and ritual probably played large
parts in their lives.
A strong effort should be made to record already excavated burials in
West Texas before information is further obscured by time. All of these materials should be treated with repect, both as unique cultural resources and as
the remains of thinking, feeling human beings.

AUTHORS’ NOTE
Data are still being collected concerning atlatl weights and other polished
stone objects from western Texas. Persons knowing of the location of such
artifacts are urged to contact Mark Parsons, Route #I, Ava, Missouri 65608.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
The authors wish to express their gratitude to the many people who aided
in the completion of this report. If any person is neglected, it is due to our
oversight, rather than any lack of appreciation. The site was discovered by
Ronnie Hill (Spur, Texas) and Mike Martin (Snyder, Texas). Notes and artifacts are in Hill’s possession.
Our thanks: to Mike Martin, who generously donated the shell artifacts to
Ronnie Hill, in order that the Old Tom Burial collection might remain together.

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Torn Burial

83

To Curtis Tunnell, State Archeologist, Bob Mallouf, and LaVerne Herrington, who provided skeletal analysis, and other archeologists and staff of
the State Archeologist Office of the Texas Historical Commission, for their
innumerable contributions to this work.
To Dr. Eileen Johnson, The Museum, Texas Tech University, and her
staff for access to the Ray Collection and files of The Museum and assistance
with several other problems relating to this project; and Dr. John Brand of the
same institution, who made several key lithic identificatiom
To Ken Perry, Director, and Barbara Baskin, Archeologist, and their staff,
Museum of the Big Bend, Sul Ross State University, Alpine, Texas, for aid in
recording the cariniform atlatl weight in their collection.
To Dr. David Mattison, Geology Department, Sul Ross State University,
Alpine, Texas, for lithic identification.
To Dr. Dee Ann Story, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin, and her staff, for cooperation and assistance in searching their collections
for comparative materials.
To Archeologists Grant Hall, Center for Archeological Research at the
University of Texas at San Antonio, Elton Prewitt, Texas Archeological Survey, and Charles Johnson, Texas Highway Department, for valuable suggestions and stimulating conversation.
To Emmett Shedd, Post, Texas, and Mrs. Fairy McWilliams, Silverton,
Texas for making their collections available for study.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E., Charles K. Chandler, AI B. Wesolowsky, and Robert M. Malina
Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery. Special Publi1976
cation of the Texas Archeological Society, 3:1-112.
Black, Craig (ed.)
History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum Journal,
1974
15:1-160.
Bushnell, David I. Jr.
Burials of the Algonquian, Siouan, and Caddoan Tribes West of the
1927
Mississippi. Bulletin of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 83:1-160.
Campbell, T. N.
Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County,
1957
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, 9(4):448-471.
Chapman, Carl H.
1975
The Archeology of Missouri, I. University of Missouri Studies, 52:1-288.
Cochrum, Dan E.
A Multiple Burial from the Caprock Area. Bulletin of the South Plains
1963
~Arc heological Society, 1:26-3 I.
Coe, J. L.
1964

The Formative Cultures of the Carolina Piedmont. Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, 54(5):1-130.

84

Texas Archeological Society

Collins, Michael B.
A Review of Llano Estacado Archeology and Ethnohistory. Plains An1971
thropologist, 16(52):85-104.
Dalley, Gardiner F. and Kenneth L. Petersen
Additional Artifacts from Hogup Cave. Appendix X. In: Melvin Aikens,
1970
Hogup Cave. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, 93:283-286.

Forrester, Robert E. Jr.
1951
A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated in Shackelford County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
22:132-143.
Gardner, Fletcher and George C. Martin
ms.
A New Type of Atlatl from a Cave Shelter on the Rio Grande near
Shumla, Val Verde County, Texas. Witte Memorial Museum Big Bend
Basket Maker Papers, 2:15-18.
Hall, Grant D.
1977
Archeological Investigations at the Ernest Witte Site, Austin County,
Texas. Manuscript on file at the Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Harrington, Mark Raymond
1924
The Ozark Bluff-Dwellers. American Anthropologist, 26(1):1-21.
1933
Gypsum Cave. Southwest Museum Papers, 8:1-197.
Harrison, Billy R. and Bob T. Griffin
1973
An Infant Burial in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin .of the Texas Archeological Society, 44:61-68.
Harrison, Billy R. and Kay L. Killen
1978
Lake Theo: A Stratified Early Man Bison Butchering and Camp Site,
Briscoe County, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum Special
Archeological Report, 1:1-108.
Hester, Thomas R.
1974
Archeological Remains from Site NV-WA-197, Western Nevada: Atlatl
and Animal Skin Pouches. Contributions of the University of California
Research Facility, 21:1-43.
Hill, Ronnie
The Old Tom Burial. Notes in the possession of the author, Spur, Texas.
ms.
Holden, W. C.
Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest Texas. Bulletin
1929
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 1:23-35.
Hole, Frank and Richard G. Wilkinson
Shell Point: A Coastal Camp and Burial Site in Brazoria County. Bulletin
1973
of the Texas Archeologica! Society, 44:5-50.
Hughes, Jack T.
Little Sunday: An Archaic Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the
1955
Texas Archeological Society, 26:55w75.
Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Of.
1978
rice of the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report, 24:1-294.

Parsons, Hill, Parker -- Old Tom Burial

85

Johnson, Eileen, Vance T. Holliday, Michael J. Kaczor, and Robert Stuckenrath
The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site. Bulletin of the Texas
1977
Archeological Society, 48:83-110.
Jokerst, C. O.
A Floodplain Burial in Randall County, Texas. Bulletin of the Lower
1972
Plains Archeological Society, 2:1-4.
Kellar, James H.
The Atlatl in North America. Indiana Historical Society Prehistory Re1955
search Series, 3(3):279-352.
Kelley, Jane Holden
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the
1964
Texas Archeological Society, 35:1-18.
Kidder, Alfred V.
The Artifacts of Pecos. Robert S. Peabody Foundation for Archaeology,
1932
Andover, Massachusetts.
Krieger, Alex D.
Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Region. Bulletin of
1956
the Texas Archeological Society, 27:195-207.
Neuman, Robert W.
Atlatl Weights from Certain Sites on the Northern and Central Great
1967
Plains. American Antiquity, 32(I):36-53.
Nuttal, Zelia
The Atlatl or Spear-Thrower of the Ancient Mexicans. Papers of the
1891
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, I(3):173198.
Parsons, Mark L.
1960
A New Artifact Type from Northwest Texas. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Houston.
1967

Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas,
During the Winter, 1966-67. State Building Commission, Archeological
Program Report, 7:1-108.
Cariniform Atlatl Weights from Western Texas. Manuscript in preparation.

Patterson, J. T.
Boat-Shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest States. The University of
1937
Texas Bulletin, 3732:1-131.
Prewitt, Elton, R.
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County,
1974
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 49:1-147.
Quinn, Jean and Jane Holden
1949
Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 20: !15-131.
Ray, Cryus N.
1933

Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of the Abeline Region. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 5:14-24.

86

Texas Archeological Society

1934

1935

Report on Two Mineralized Skeletons. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 6:116-118.
Some Unusual Cremated Burials. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, 7:130-131.

1936

Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 8:9-16.

1938

The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, 10:193-207.

1939

Some Unusual Abeline Region Burials. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 11:226-250.

1940

Four Sand Dune Culture Burials. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, 12:241-242.

1943

Human Burial Covered by Twenty-one Feet of Silt. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, 15:110-116.

1946

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 17:104-107.

Ring, E. Raymond Jr.
1961
An Evaluation of Radio-Carbon Dates from the Galena Site, Southeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 31:317-325.
Runkles, Frank A.
The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite near Post, Texas. Bulletin of
1964
the Texas Archeological Society, 35:101-125.
Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson Meade
1947
Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas. Bulletin of
the Geological Society of America, 58:927-954.
Shawn, Ronnie A.
Salt Lake Burial. Transactions of the Eighth Regional Archeological
1973
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, 8:1-8.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society, 25:1-562.
Taylor, Walter W.
A Burial Bundle from Coahuila, Mexico. Papers of the Archeological
1968
Society of New Mexico, 1:23-56.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1964
Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, 35:83-94.
1977

Fluted Projectile Point Production as Revealed by Lithic Specimens from
the Adair-Steadman Site in Northwest Texas. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal, 17:140-168.

Tunnell, Curtis D. and Jack T. Hughes
1955
An Archaic Bison Kill in the Texas Panhandle. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, 28:63-70.

Parsons, Hill, Parker -- Old Tom Burial

87

Webb, William S.
Indian Knoll Site Oh2, Ohio County, Kentucky. The University of Ken1946
tucky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, 4(3): 115-365.
Webb, William S. and David L. Dejarnette
1942
An Archaeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi and Tennessee. Bulletin of the Bureau
of American Ethnology, 129:1-536.
Webb, William S. and William G. Haag
1939

The Chiggerville Site, Site 1, Ohio County, Kentucky. The University of
Kentucky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, 4(1):1-62.

Witte, Adolph Henry
1955

A Double Indian Burial from Donley County, Texas. Panhandle-Plains
Historical Review, 28:82-86.

Word, James H.
1963
Floydada Country Club Site, 41-FL-1. Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, 1:37-63.
1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the South
Plains Archeological Society, 2:55-102.

PREHISTORIC BISON
POPULATIONS OF
NORTHCENTRAL TEXAS

ABSTRACT
Dillehay (1974) offered a diachronic model of changes in density and distribution of bison populations on the Southern Plains that has considerable implications
for interpretation of paleoclimates. The broad-spectrum geographical approach
utilized by Dillehay is critiqued; applicability of the model in terms of prehistoric
data from northcentral Texas is examined. Interpretations offered suggest that an
increase in bison density in Northcentral Texas occurred during the Late NeoAmerican period (A.D. 1200-1600). Prior to this time, bison probably appeared
as small scattered herds in the tall grass prairies and Cross Timbers.

INTRODUCTION
Plains archeology and anthropology have been closely associated with
the image of nomadic bison hunters. Consequently, understanding the demographic aspects of bison ecology are an important part of the science.
Bison unquestionably represent an extremely important aspect of plains prehistory; and archeologists must strive to better understand the changes which
have occurred in bison populations through time.
Dillehay (1974) proposed a model of changing bison populations in the
Southern Plains area which suggested that three long term periods of wide
spread bison presence were separated by two significant periods in which
density and distribution of bison were greatly reduced. The model was well
received and incorporated into a recent synthesis of Plains archeology (Wedel, 1978:187-189).
The Dillehay model is criticized at a number of levels. The model is evaluated in terms of data available from the prairies and Cross Timbers of
Northcentral Texas. Specific comments regarding the author’s and Dillehay’s
(1974) use and interpretation of data is limited to data from Northcentral
Texas. Extrapolation of these criticism to other areas of the Southern Plains
may be appropriate, but must be presented by individuals more familiar with
the data than the author.
Several critical comments regarding use of data from Northcentral Texas,
are presented. Specific comments regarding the nature and context of bison
remains in Northcentral Texas are provided along with an interpretation of
past bison distributions in Northcentral Texas.

90

Texas Archeological Society

THE SOUTHERN PLAINS AS A REGION
Originally developed by geographers, the concept of a region remains
essentially a classificatory tool. As a classification device, the regional concept
must be applied to specific questions or problems (Dean, 1978; Grigg, 1972).
Regions which are defined without considering the problems to be solved are
frequently either too large, hence camouflaging crucial data amid an abundance of background noise; or too small and therefore lacking one or more
crucial elements needed to solve the problem (Judge, 1976). The model
proposed by Dillehay (1974) to explain changes in Southern Plains bison
population distribution through time suffers from just this problem.
The region defined by Dillehay (1974) included all or parts of New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, and Louisiana. Through the examination of faunal
remains associated with archeological sites, it was proposed that long term
periods of presence and absence of bison could be distinguished in the region.
Two absence periods from about 8000-7000 to 4500 B.P. (6000-5000 to
2500 B.C.) and from 1500 to 800-700 B.P. (A.D. 500 to 1200-1300) were
interpreted as separating periods of wide spread bison presence. These long
term changes were attributed to a combination of bison range changes and
fluctuations in bison densities resulting primarily from changes in the Plains
climatic regime.
The four state area in Dillehay’s (1974) Southern Plains region consists of
up to 48 botanic provinces (Kuchler, 1964). One of the unstated assumptions
of the model is that bison were equally distributed throughout these biotic
provinces at any given point in time. This is clearly a poor assumption. The
presence of bison in the oak-hickory forests of East Texas has far greater
climatic implications than does the presence of bison in the High Plains of the
Llano Estacado.
In lumping these biotic zones into one large region, Dillehay (1974)
created a false image of homogeneity. Changes in bison population distribution, or any animal, can best be dealt with in terms of regions which are
smaller and ecologically more homogenous. By combining a large number of
biotic zones, it is quite possible that critical variability in the diachronic density
and distribution of bison populations is lost in the diversity of ecological zones.

REPORTING OF FAUNAL DATA
Before reviewing the faunal evidence, it is necessary to consider some of
the problems in interpreting these data. One of the major handicaps in dealing
with any type of faunal remains in Texas is the quality of the archeological
data. Although faunal remains were collected for years through standard data
recovery techniques, the quantification and reporting of faunal remains has
only become common in the last ten years. Consequently, much of the faunal
data recovered from archeological sites in Northcentral Texas is unanalyzed
and unreported. The small sample of sites with reported faunal remains, in
proportion to the total number of investigated sites, cannot be overemphasized.

Lynott - Bison Populations

91

PHYSICAL AND CULTURAL CONTEXT OF
FAUNAL REMAINS
Sediment churning by natural forces is another factor which inhibits diachronic interpretation of faunal data, Churning of archaeological deposits can
be caused by a number of factors. Pedoturbation is fairly common in many
areas of Northcentral Texas due to the vertisolic nature of the sediments
(Duffield, 1970). The shrink swell potential is great and considerable displacement of artifacts is common.
Bioturbation of site deposits, primarily through rodent burrowing, is fairly
common in Northcentral Texas. Rodents are extremely common in prairie
ecozones and capable of considerable sediment disturbance. Although bison
bones may not be greatly displaced by rodent activity, artifacts used to provide relative dating of the bones can be greatly churned. The sample of sites
selected by Dillehay (1974) to support his model failed to consider the
churned nature of many of these sites.
For example, the Pecan Springs site (Sorrow, 1966) is placed in Presence
Period II, Absence Period II, and Presence Period III. This placement indicates an occupation ranging from 4500 to 450 B.P. (2500 B.C. to A.D.
1550). Associated artifacts and the single radiocarbon date from the site
(1950 + 130 B,P.; A.D. I) support this interpretation. However, Dillehay
(1974) claimed that bison were present at Pecan Springs during Presence
Period II (4500 to 1500 B.P.; 2500 B.C. to A.D. 500) and III (800 to 450
B.P.; A.D. 1200 to 1550) and absent at the site during Absence Period II
(1500 to 800 B.P.; A.D. 500 to 1200).
An examination of the stratigraphic context of Pe.can Springs reveals
2.7 ft of dark, undifferentiated sediment. It is virtually impossible to recognize
the boundaries of the chronological stages in the stratigraphic profile. In addition, the sediment is vertisolic and archeological material likely to be highly
churned. With the exception of material recovered from occupational features, the cultural material from Pecan Springs probably should be treated as
a single mixed assemblage.
Another important shortcoming of the model is its failure to recognize the
distinction between bison which were hunted, killed, and butchered in the
area of the site and tools made of bison bone which may have been transported great distances. For example, the only bison remains reported at the
Upper Farmersville site are bison scapula hoes associated as grave goods with
a burial (Harris, 1945; Stephenson, 1949). Since less than 25% of the interments from the East Fork of the Trinity have any form of mortuary goods
(Lynott, 1975:120-121), it is likely that these bison scapula hoes are symbols
of high social status. Mortuary goods associated with a high status individual
may have traveled a considerable distance (trade goods or items representative of high social status) before they were placed in this grave.
Dillehay (1974) interpreted these bison scapula hoes as dating to Presence Period III (800-700 to 500 B.P. ; A.D. 1200-1300 to 1500) despite the
lack of temporally diagnostic artifacts associated with the burial. This temporal
interpretation was made even more speculative by the fact that temporally
diagnostic artifacts associated with the site indicate occupation from the Late
Archaic until about A.D. 1500. This time span covers Presence Period II,
Absence Period II, and Presence Period III.

92

Texas Archeological Society

In reality, there is no certainty that these bison scapula hoes were obtained
in Northcentral Texas, nor at which point in the site’s occupation they were
placed in the grave. Thus at this site, Dillehay (1974) converted a very complex situation into a simplified presence or absence situation supporting his
model.
Too many factors are potentially involved in the movement of bison bone
from the time the animal is killed and butchered until the time of its excavating
to treat the problem as a simple case of presence or absence. Long distance
trade, post-depositional bioturbation, and the general shortage of reported
faunal remains complicate the situation beyond the point where presence or
absence is useful. The context of bison remains cannot be ignored or manipulated.

NORTHCENTRAL TEXAS
Northcentr*al Texas is a small part of the four state region defined by
Dillehay (1974) as the Southern Plains (Fig. I). The area consists of three
north south bands of tall grass prairie separated by two north south bands of
prairie parkland called the Cross Timbers. The prairie zones are characterized
as grasslands with an absence of trees and shrubs except in the valleys of
major rivers and along the banks of intermittent tributary streams. The Cross
Timbers consist of an overstory composed primarily of oaks, spatially distributed in a parkland pattern. The Cross Timbers understory differed very little
from the grasses and forbs found in the prairie. The river valleys of Northcentral Texas represent westward extensions of the East Texas hardwood forests.
Animal resources in the tall grass prairie and Cross Timbers, exclusive of
the wooded bottomlands and gallery forests, were dominated by a variety of
small and medium sized mammals. Rodents and birds were especially numerous. Bison, although present in the tall grass prairie and Cross Timbers, were
not as numerous in the historic period as herds in the mixed prairie and High
Plains to the west (Shelford, 1963:332; Blair, 1950; Gunnerson, 1972).
One of the reasons for this is the nutritional composition of native prairie
grasses. Mature short grass has a protein/carbohydrate ratio which is not only
higher than that of the tall grass prairie but better suited to the protein/
carbohydrate balance required by bison (Johnson, 1951; Larson, 1940). The
interpretation offered is that bison in Northcentral Texas were generally limited to small, sporadic herds.
Bison remains are reported from only 13 sites in Northcentral Texas. A
brief summary of the sites and recovery context follows.
The Dixon Branch site (Harris and Harris, 1970) is a bison kill site on a
terrace of White Rock Creek near Dallas. The bison was a juvenile. Three
small Fresno points were recovered from between the ribs. Charcoal associated with another bison in the same geological stratum (approximately 20
meters distance from the young bison) was radiocarbon dated at 475 B.P.
(A.D. 1475). Although a standard deviation was not reported, the date appears to fit reasonably well with the estimated age of Fresno points. Although
this is the only published account of a bison kill in the White Rock Creek
drainage, R. K. Harris (personal communication) has recorded similar sites in
the area.

Lynott - Bison Populations

93

The Wolters site (Morris and Morris, 1970) is a bison kill on the Elm Fork
of the Trinity River in northwest Dallas County. The bison was exposed in the
side of the lower terrace by a front-end loader. There is evidence of on-site
butchering activities. A triangular arrow point associated with the kill indicates
a Late Neo-American occupation.
The Harrell site (Krieger, 1946; Hughes, 1942) is located at Possum
Kingdom Lake. WPA excavation resulted in recovery of 32 human burials;
16 were interred in limestone slab lined cists. At least three multiple interments were recorded, varying from three to six individuals per grave. AIthough houses were not exposed, 135 hearths in a variety of forms were
excavated. Ceramics were almost exclusively shell tempered Nocona Plain
vessels and sherds. The locality is the type site for the Henrietta Focus. Unquantified food remains reported from the site include bison, deer, antelope,
shellfish, and maize.
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES WITH REPORTED BISON REMAINS
IN NORTHCENTRAL TEXAS

©

iI

/II

Fig. I Prehistoric sites with reported bison remains in Northcentral
Texas. 1. Dixon Branch; 2. Wolters; 3. Harrell; 4. Coyote; 5. Glass; 6.
Chicken House; 7. Hackberry; 8. Pictograph; 9. Kyle; 10. Gossett Bottoms; 11. Winston; 12. Pecan Springs; 13. Upper Farmersville; 14. Ham
Creek; 15. Bear Creek,

94

Texas Archeological Society

The Coyote site is located on a terrace of the Red River near Spanish Fort,
Texas (Woodall, 1967)~ The site is relatively large (about 17,000 sq m) and
appears to be affiliated with the Henrietta Focus. Limited excavation of this
Late Neo-American site provided evidence of 11 round cache pits, one refuse
pit, and three hearths. A bison scapula hoe was reported among the modified
bone artifacts. Although a quantified description of the faunal remains was
not reported, examination of the collection suggests that bison was present
(Timothy Perttula, personal communication).
The Glass site also is located on a terrace of the Red River near Spanish
Fort (Lorrain, 1967) It appears to be another large site attributable to the
Henrietta Focus. Limited excavation revealed the presence of nine bell
shaped cache pits and an oval pit house. Associated artifacts are suggestive of
a Late Neo-American occupation. Although faunal remains from the site
were not reported, 21 bison scapula hoes and nine bison tibia digging sticks
were described. The site appears to be in a relatively undisturbed context.
The Chicken House site (Lorrain, 1969), at Fish Creek Lake, represents a
semi-permanent village affiliated with the Henrietta Focus. Excavations at the
site revealed three oval houses with interior hearths and cache pits, seven
miscellaneous cache pits, 11 miscellaneous hearths, two ash pits, and nine
smudge pits. Four radiocarbon dates for the site fall between 670 and 320
B~P. (A.D~ 1280 and 1630). Bison elements were reported but greatly outnumbered by deer remains.
The Winston site (Jeffrey Richner, personal communication) is located in
the bank of the Trinity River near the spillway of Cedar Creek Lake. The site is
buried in the modern Trinity River flood plain. Recent test excavations revealed a stratified sequence. A thin gray paleosol layer contained a circular
depression associated with a shell lens horizon. The feature contained fragments of a bison mandible and a Iongbone in association with a deer element,
numerous freshwater shellfish, scrapers, an arrow point, and incised
ceramics. Two radiocarbon samples from immediately below the horizon
were dated 505 + 98 B.P. (A.D. 1445) and 547 + 107 B.P. (A.D. 1403).
Data appear to be in primary context.
The Pictograph site (Stephenson, 1970) is a rockshelter at Lake Whitney,
on the Brazos River. The site is stratified, with both Early and Late NeoAmerican occupations. River Basin Surveys excavations revealed 14
hearths, three slab lined cache pits, two human burials, and several pictographs. Deer was the most common animal represented at the site~ but a
bison element was present in the Late Neo~American occupation.
The Kyle site (Jelks, 1962) is another rockshelter in the Lake Whitney
area. The site is a stratified multicomponent site containing Late Archaic and
Early and Late Neo-American occupations. Fourteen radiocarbon dates
ranging from 1980 to 390 B.P. (30 B.C. to A.D. 1560) support this interpretatiom River Basin Surveys excavations revealed three hearths, one cache
pit, and three human burials. Bison elements were reported from only the
Late Neo-American occupation.
The Bear Creek Shelter (Lynott, 1978) is another stratified rockshelter
occupation on the Brazos River at Lake Whitney. The site contains Middle,
Late, and Transitional Archaic occupations underlying Early and Late NeoAmerican occupations. Limited testing revealed 20 hearths, three shell concentrations, a human burial, and a thin sheet midden. Twelve radiocarbon

Lynott - Bison Populations

95

dates ranging from 4150 to 630 B.P. (2200 B.C. to A.D. 1320) support the
artifact associations. Faunal remains are dominated by riverine/floodplain
forest animals; but a few bison remains were present in all but the Middle
Archaic occupation zone.
The Hackberry site (Barber, 1966, 1969) is located on a terrace along
Little Elm Creek at Garza-Little Elm Lake northwest of Dallas. Erosional
forces from wave action of the lake exposed four refuse pits and five cooking
ash pits. Artifactual remains suggest a Late Neo-American occupation. Bison
remains were present but unquantified.
The L. O. Ray site (Gilmore and Hoffrichter, 1964) is a Late Archaic and
Early Neo-American site in mixed context in the South Sulphur River
drainage. Occupation features were not reported. Deer, rabbit, and miscellaneous rodents represented the majority of faunal remains, but a bison element was identified. The cultural deposit was reported to be a midden and
temporal indicators suggest it was highly churned.
The Gossett Bottoms site (Story, 1965) is located along Cedar Creek in
what is now Cedar Creek Lake. Excavations revealed the presence of a human and a dog burial. The faunal assemblage contains five bison elements
and 425 deer elements in association with Late Archaic and Neo-American
artifact assemblages. The site is situated on a low rise in the floodplain and has
a loose, sandy, cultural deposit capping sterile clay. Considerable rodent
activity was recorded.
The Pecan Springs site (Sorrow, 1966) is located in the Waxahachie
Creek drainage at Bardwell Lake. Excavations revealed seven hearths, three
human burials, two refuse pits, and three amorphic rock concentrations. Projectile point styles indicated Late Archaic and Early and Late Neo-American
occupations in a mixed context. A radiocarbon date of 1950 + 130 B.P.
(A.D. 1) seems to represent the Late Archaic occupation. Analysis of a sample of the faunal remains (Heartfield, ms.) identified primarily deer (4315
elements) along with five elements of bison.
The Ham Creek site (Forrester, 1964) is one of the few known burned
rock middens north of the Brazos River in Northcentral Texas. The site is on
the second terrace of Ham Creek and consists of at least 6000 sq m of burned
limestone and midden sediment. Excavations revealed a human burial in
association with an Archaic artifact assemblage. An unquantified amount of
bison remains were reported.
The Upper Farmersville site (Harris, 1945) is located on Pilot Grove
Creek in Collin County. Surface investigations and excavation of features
exposed by plowing provide evidence of Late Archaic and Early and Late
Neo-American artifact assemblages. The sediment matrix at the site is a vertisolic clay that has been heavily churned. Bison remains reported from the site
consist of eight scapula hoes found in association with a human burial.

CONCLUSIONS
A summary of the data relating to the nature and context of bison remains
from Northcentral Texas is presented in Table 1. These data represent a
compilation of published evidence of bison remains from the region. Several
cases of surface remains which could not be definitively distinguished from

Texas Archeological Society

96

~

"~

o=

~ "~ "~o

~o

"~o

o~

0

~o o ~

~

~ .~o ~

0

.~- ~ "4~

~ .~-

"~

-~ ~

u3

0

0

0

~o

o

o

z

z

0

~

o

0

r"
0

-~o~
~0,1

0

0

z

z

~q

r~

.-(3

<C

z

Z

z

z

0

G3

-5o

"Sa
"F-.

u~

ua

o~

¯..O

03
o

~

o~ ~
-’S m-~
,.o
~

r..4"{:~

-o

r~

E
0
0

0

0
r-,

.x=

m
.x=
0

r"

’T"

c~

.g

o

~

o

~

..~

i

0

Lynott - Bison Populations

o~

80oo~~

~
u

E
E

.b

0

"5

._

o~

0

’5

~

~

o .~,

~

~,

~.

~ .~ o

E

o
a2
Off3

0~

<

~

.

+I~

~<, o

+,

o

o

~

~

E

°6

E

~

< E

Z

do
Z

e~ ,.

0

o

~

o

~o~

.~, .~,
<~ <~-~,

o6
<

.~

~z=~
~’~

~E

0’.~

o

o

_o

.~

,~~

~_o E~.~

-

o

~

o

o

=o
oO

~

.~

z~, g

o

o

~

~

,~,~.~.~

.~

97

98

Texas Archeological Society

domestic cattle bone were eliminated as were bison remains unassociated
with artifact assemblages (e.g., Skinner, 1975),
Bison remains are relatively rare in Northcentral Texas. Throughout the
region, white-tailed deer is the most common mammal in prehistoric faunal
assemblages. Bison remains occur with a greater frequency along the Brazos
River; but this may be an interpretive bias produced by the greater quantity of
research conducted in this area. From a temporal standpoint, there is more
evidence of bison remains in the Late Neo-American than any other period of
prehistory. Bison were reported from definite Archaic contexts at Ham Creek
and Bear Creek Shelter. They were reported at only one site from an Early
Neo-American context~ from ten Late Neo-American sites throughout
Northcentral Texas~ and from three mixed multicomponent sites.
From these data, it appears that bison remains are most common during
the Late Neo-American period (800-400 B.P. ; A.D. 1200-1600). It is uncertain whether this is a result of changes in density and distribution of bison
populations or changes in the exploitative strategy of prehistoric human
groups. At any rate, there is little evidence to support the hypothesis of widespread bison populations in Northcentral Texas prior to 800 B.P. (A.D.
1200).
After 800 B,P. (A.D. 1200), bison remains are present at a number of
sites but greatly outnumbered by remains of white-tailed deer and other
woodland mammals. Assuming that native human populations in Northcentral Texas were firmly committed to exploitation of bottomland faunal resources, it is quite possible that a major increase in bison population density
would not be evidenced in the archeological record. However, it seems unlikely, based upon the diversity of exploited faunal resources from most sites,
that bison would be ignored if they were abundantly Iavailable¯
Gunnerson (1972) proposed that a dramatic increase in bison number
and distribution on the Southern Plains occurred during the Protohistoric
period. The model she presented proposed that following a major drought of
the 600’s B.P. (A.D¯ 1400’s), bison returned to the Central and Southern
Plains in greater numbers than before¯ The vast numbers of bison were hypothesized to have served as a deterent for Plains horticulturalists who might
have reoccupied the area, while serving to encourage the southward movement of proto-Apachean peoples.
Bison are best adapted to short grass plains. Drying conditions associated
with the Altithermal are likely to have increased the area of short grass plains
at the expense of tall grass prairie, thereby increasing the preferred habitat of
bison (Reeves, 1973). If the 600’s B.P. (A¯D. 1400’s) drought had a similar
effect, then it is highly likely that bison were present in vast numbers in much
of the Southern Plains area during the late prehistoric period¯ This speculation is supported in part by available data from Northcentral Texas. Although
there is no archeological evidence for vast numbers of bison during the Late
Neo-American period, there is evidence of an increase in bison exploitation at
that time.
This brief discussion was fairly critical of the diachronic model of changing
bison populations (Dillehay, 1974) for several reasons. The model ignored
the ecological variability of the Southern Plains region, treating the entire area
as a homogenous region of study. Examination of data from Northcentral

Lynott - Bison Populations

99

Texas offered in support of the model indicates the context of bison remains
from several sites is questionable due to the disturbed nature of the deposits.
The model also treated bison bone tools, which may have moved great
distances through trade or migration, as evidence of bison presence in
Northcentral Texas. Finally, evidence from Northcentral Texas does not indicate major changes in density or distribution of local bison populations until at
least 800 B.P. (A.D. 1200). Even during the Late Neo-American period,
when bison remains are most common, the only evidence of a truly bison
hunting economy is probably limited to sites in the western extremes of the tall
grass prairie area.
The model proposed by Dillehay (1974) was an ambitious attempt to
develop a synthetic model of changing density and distribution of bison population on the Southern Plains. Implications of the proposed model are extremely significant for interpretation of past climatic and ecological conditions. Before accepting the model, the evidence for changes in density and
distribution of bison populations in local biotic zones should be carefully examined.
The model is not fully applicable to Northcentral Texas. Careful examination of data in other regions may provide similar interpretations. The proposed interpretation suggests that bison populations were relatively small in
the tall grass prairies and Cross Timbers of Northcentral Texas until the Late
Neo-American period (post 800 B.P.; post A.D. 1200). At that time, the
relative density of bison populations increased. The increase, however, was
not nearly to the density of bison herds found on the High Plains to the west.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
This paper benefitted from critical commentary by Jeffrey Richner and Timothy Perttula.
Figures were prepared by Melodie Tune. The author gratefully acknowledges the support of Dr.
F. A. Calabrese and the staff of the Midwest Archeological Center for their help in producing this
paper.

REFERENCES CITED
Barber Bryon L.
1966

The Irish Farm Site, 18C4-2. The Record, 22(2):9-14.

1969

The Hackberry Site. The Record, 25(3):18-24.

Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, 2:93-117.
Dean, Jeffery S.
1978

An Evaluation of the Initial SARG Research Design. In: R. C. Euler and
G. J. Gummerman (eds.), Investigations of the Southwestern Anthro.
pological Research Group, pp. 103-117. Museum of Northern Arizona,
Flagstaff.

Dillehay, Tom D.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist, 19(65):180-196.

100

Texas Archeological Society

Duffield, L. F.
Vertisols and Their Implications for Archaeological Research. American
1970
Anthropologist, 72:1055-1062.
Forrester, R. E.
The Ham Creek Site: An Edwards Plateau Aspect Site in Johnson
1964
County, Texas. Tarrant County Archeological Society.
Gilmore, Kathleen and Norma Hoffrichter
1964
Preliminary Investigations, L. O. Ray Site, Delta County, Texas. The
Record, 19(I):3-17.

Grigg, Davis
The Logic of Regional Systems. In: P. W. English and R. C. Mayfield
1972
(eds.), Man, Space and Environment, pp. 450-480. Oxford University
Press, London.
Gunnerson, Dolores A.
1972
Man and Bison on the Plains in the Protohistoric Period. Plains Anthropologist, 17(55):1-10.
Harris, R~ K.
Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
1945
Archeological and Paleontological Society, 16:84-89.
Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
A Bison Kill on Dixon’s Branch, Site 27A2-5, Dallas County, Texas. The
1970
Record, 27(1):I-2.
Heartfield, Lorrain
ms.
Analytical Description of Animal Bone from Archeological Sites: Pecan
Springs (41ELll), Spring Canyon (41HC20). Manuscript on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.
Hughes, Jack T.
An Archaeological Report on the Harrell Site of Northcentral Texas.
1942
Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Jelks, Edward B~
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas~ University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archeology
Series, 5:1-115.
Johnson, C. W.
Protein as a Factor in the Distribution of the American Bisom Geographi1951
cal Review, 41:330-331.
Judge, W. James
Problems in Regional Research Designs. Paper presented at the third
1976
Southwestern Cultural Resource Management Seminar, Albuquerque.
Krieger, Alex D.
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
1946
Texas Publication, 4640:1~366.
Kuchler, A~ W.
Potential Natural Vegetation of the Coterminus United States. American
1964
Geographical Society, 36:1-116.

Lynott - Bison Populations

101

Larson, Floyd
1940
The Role of the Bison in Maintaining the Short Grass Plains. Ecology,
21:113-121.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1967
The Glass Site. In: R. B. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb Jr.
(eds.), A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory,
pp. 24-44. Southern Methodist University, Dallas. Report to the National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
1969

Archaeological Excavations in the Fish Creek Reservoir. Southern
Methodist University Contributions in Anthropology, 4:1-160.

Lynott, Mark J.
1975

Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974. Southern Methodist
University Contributions in Anthropology, 16:1-136.

1978

An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney, Te~:as. Southern Methodist University, ,~rchaeology Research Program, Research Report, 115:1-109.

Morris, Virginia and Bill Morris
1970

Excavation of Bison Remains in Northwest Dallas County. The Record,
27(1):2-5.

Reeves, Brian
1973 The Concept of an Altithermal Hiatus in Northern Plains Prehistory.
American Anthropologist, 75(5) : 122 i- 1253.
Shelford, Victor E.
1963
The Ecology of North America. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Skinner, S. Alan
1975

The Dell Ray Pipkin Site, Hill County, Texas. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report, 65:1-15.

Sorrow, William M.
The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. Papers of the Texas
1966
Archeological Salvage Project, 10:1-68.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1949
Archeological Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs; A Preliminary Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, 20:21-62.
1970

Archaeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 40:37-257.

Story, Dee Ann
1965
The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman
Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 36:163257.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1978

The Prehistoric Plains. In: Jesse D. Jennings (ed.), Ancient Native
Americans, pp. 183-219. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

Woodall, J. Ned
1967
The Coyote Site. In: R. B. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb Jr.
(eds.), A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory,
pp. 15-23. Southern Methodist University, Dallas. Report to the National Science Foundation, Washington D.C.

A
L. W. Patterson
ABSTRACT
The overall prehistory of the upper Texas coast is reviewed, with archeological data currently available from both published and unpublished sources. Recent
research progress is noted and recommendations for areas of future research are
given.

INTRODUCTION
Until recently, a significant amount of published information was not
available on the prehistory of the upper Texas coast. In the last regional
reviews of Texas archeology (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
1958), the upper Texas coast was not covered by a separate summary. In the
recent past, the upper Texas coast was considered to be archeologically unknown. It is now possible to present an outline of the overall prehistory of this
region. Much work remains to be done, however, before a detailed synthesis
of this region can be made.
Wheat’s (1953) survey of a bayou system west of Houston was the first
publication of detailed archeological information in this region. It is still one of
the most important information sources in the literature today. The Texas
Archeological Survey, Texas A & M University and the Houston Archeological Society have been the principal organizations conducting research. Some
work also has been done by Rice University and Southern Methodist University.
Work by professional groups has not been regionally uniform, due to
funds being available mainly for the survey of new water reservoirs and flood
control projects. This situation has led to more published information being
available for littoral and marshland sites than for adjacent inland areas. However, more balanced information is now becoming available.
Both professionals and amateurs have made significant contributions to
the regional archeological data base; and good cooperation exists between
these groups. The Houston Archeological Society assisted professional
groups in surveys and excavations of the Livingston (McClurkan, 1968) and
Wallisville reservoirs. The Late Prehistoric Mitchell Ridge site complex on
Galveston Island was originally surveyed by the Houston Archeological Society; and was the location of the 1978 TAS annual field school. This site is
being used as the basis for a doctoral dissertation (Bruce, ms.).
There is some ethnographic data available for this region and several
archeological sites were recorded with evidence of European contact. However, this article is a review of only the regional prehistory. Based on the files
of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the majority of

104

Texas Archeological Society

archeological sites on the upper Texas coast do not have evidence of European contact.
Research progress covering the upper Texas coast has been steady over
the past 15 years. The last published regional bibliography (Patterson, 1979a)
contained 228 entries, a 37% increase over a previous issue (Patterson,
1976a). Much of the current work by professional groups has limitations on
research contributions due to the nature of contract archeology for environmental impact studies (Patterson, 1978a).

DEFINITIONS OF REGION
The upper Texas coast is a 20 county region (southeast Texas) of coastal
and adjacent counties, bounded on the west by the Brazos River and on the
east by the Sabine River (Fig. 1). With minor differences, this is the same as
Campbell’s (1958:178) previous definition. Archeological studies have not
been made uniformly throughout this region. However, a number of sites are
recorded in all counties involved (TARL). Detailed resolution of many archeological questions must await a more uniform survey of the entire regiom
The upper Texas coast has several ecological zones, including coastal
plains, mixed woodlands, marshlands, and littoral areas. Water resources
include fresh water, brackish water, and salt water areas. There are some
corresponding changes in aboriginal subsistence patterns.
In a broader sense, this region joins the boundaries of several geographical and cultural areas (Willey, 1966:Fig. 1-1), including the Eastern
woodlands, Gulf coast, and Southern Great Plains. Willey (1966:329) includes the upper Texas coast in a northeast Mexico -- south Texas region,
apparently based on the Archaic lifeway practiced over most of his defined
region.
The Upper Texas coast exhibits some variations in subsistence patterns.
Differences are due to localized food resources. However, this region was
very conservative in regard to cultural change. This conservatism would be
expected of peoples engaged only in nomadic hunting and gathering activities.
The post-Pleistocene environments in this region may have been relatively stable over a long time period (Jennings, 1974:70). However, there
were climatic fluctuations (Bryson et. al., 1970:Table 3~ Gunn and Weir,
1976:Fig. 2) which could affect subsistence activities at any given time. The
greatest differences in climate and environment would have occurred during
glacial maximum. The coastal land area would have been greater then (T. C.
Patterson, 1973:16-17).
The post-Pleistocene period experienced a continuing subsidence of the
Gulf coastline, aggravated in modern time by high withdrawal rates from
coastal freshwater aquifers. In respect to changes in sea level, Gagliano
(1977: I) stated that "The possibilities for drowned habitation sites on the Gulf
shelf, then, is from 55,000 to 3,500 B.P." Although a number of early littoral
sites now may be underwater, there has not been any success in locating
underwater sites (L. E. Aten, personal communication).
There have been a number of continuing changes in river and stream
routes that must be accounted for in archeological studies of this region. Old
stream meanders are easily observed from the air. Prehistoric sites on Gulf

Patterson -- Upper Texas Coast

105

coast barrier beaches of Northeast Texas cannot be very old as these beaches
were formed in the Late Holocene, after 6,000 B.P. (Gagliano, 1977:Plate
1). Other references to the geology of this region include Bernard et al.
(1970) and Fisher et al. (1972, 1973).

CHRONOLOGY
Little data for absolute dating of archeological remains are available for
this region. Aten (1971:Fig. 10) synthesized a culture trait chronology,
mainly for post-ceramic periods, for locations on the Texas coast from
Galveston Bay to Corpus Christi Bay. The broad time periods of archeological traits generally used in studies of adjacent regione seem to apply fairly well
to artifact types in the stratigraphic sequence of the upper Texas coast and are
used. Caution must be used, however, as there may be regional differences in
absolute chronologies of the uses of various artifact types. There are few
radiocarbon dates available for the upper Texas coast before the Late Archaic.
The earliest recognized human occupation in this region is the Paleoindian period, approximately 7,000 to 12,000 B.P. (Jennings, 1974:Fig.
3.27; Prewitt, 1974:Fig. 7). According to Muller-Beck (1967:Fig. 1), this is
the terminal Pleistocene. The termination of the Paleoindian period has not
been established with great chronological precision.
The earliest materials are a few undated surface finds of Clovis fluted
points (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:177; Long, 1977). Long (1977) described
finds of both classic and eastern varieties of Clovis points found on a beach
FIGURE 1
AREA OF UPPER TEXAS COAST

IRIS

EASTERN TEXAS
UPPER TEXAS COAST

Fig. 1 Location of Upper Texas Coast Counties.

106

Texas Archeological Society

near Beaumont. This area could have been a grassland area before coastal
subsidence. Evidence is unavailable in this region for slightly later Folsom
fluted points.
Hester (ms.) summarized the Late Pleistocene archeology for the entire
Texas coast, but details remain vague due to small data base. Many Paleoindian sites may be presently underwater due to coastal subsidence. It is common to find Pleistocene faunal remains on or near coastal beaches (Long,

1977).
Archeological surveys connected with oil and gas well drilling in underwater locations have found nothing of significance to date, despite several million dollars in study funding. Jackson (1979) stated that $16 million was spent
on 676 surveys to November, 1978 with no archeological finds located by
OCS Cultural Surveys. However, there are traces of early Paleoindian occupation in this region. Internal records of Shell Oil Company (personal examination) list several radiocarbon dates for elephant remains on the upper
Texas coast, but not in apparent association with human artifacts.
The next chronological period to be considered is the Archaic. This is
generally accepted as a post-Pleistocene period ending with the start of
ceramics (Jennings, 1974:213). For the upper Texas coast, the Archaic extended from the end of the Paleoindian period (7,000 B.P.) to the start of
pottery (approximately 1,900 B.P.) (Aten et al., 1976:Fig. 16). This time
span differs from Prewitt’s (1974:Fig. 7) definition of the Archaic for Central
Texas, where the Archaic ends at 1,200 B.P. However, pottery appears
earlier on the upper Texas coast. For discussion, the Archaic period is divided
arbitrarily into an Early period (7,000 to 5,000 B.P.), a Middle period (5,000
to 3,500 B.P.), and a Late period (3,500 to 1,900 B.P.). These time brackets
are convenient for use in comparison with artifact types and dating in adjacent
regions.
The transition from Paleoindian to Archaic is vague and an exact chronological sequence for artifact types is unavailable. Regional differences in
Texas appear to exist. For example, the Plainview point type is considered to
be Paleoindian at Lubbock Lake, radiocarbon dated to approximately
10,000 B.P. (E. Johnson, personal communication). Suhm and Jelks
(1962:239) showed the possible occurrence of Plainview points as late as
6,000 B.P. (not based on radiocarbon dates) in Central and East Texas.
McCormick (1976:40) noted the presence of Scottsbluff Paleoindian type
points on early Archaic sites in Northcentral Texas~
Radiocarbon dating of cultural remains from the Early Archaic has not
been done in this region. The data base for this period is too small for development of even a relative chronological sequence. Another problem in developing definitions of various time ranges is that some types of projectile points
were used for long time periods.
Several types of projectile points that are generally recognized as Late
Paleoindian or Early Archaic are found in this region. These include: Plainview (Wheat, 1953:213; McClure, 1977:11; McGuff and Cox, 1973:21;
Patterson, 1978b:3; Aten et al., 1976:30; Patterson, 1976b); San Patrice
(Duke, 1971; McClure, 1977:11; Long, 1977; McGuff and Cox, 1973:21;
Patterson, 1978b:3); Angostura (Ambler, 1967:Fig. 23; Patterson,
1978b:3); and Scottsbluff (Bickley, 1964).

Patterson -- Upper Texas Coast

107

The San Patrice point type has been particularly difficult to assign a temporal placement because of conflicting data. Wheat (1953:211, type 124)
gave an example in apparent post-ceramic context, although this could be
due to stratigraphic mixing. Most examples seen to place the San Patrice
point type at least somewhere in the pre-ceramic Archaic period.
Some points were found in the lowest stratum of site 41HR315 (L. W.
Patterson, field notes) in northwest Harris County. These points fit Shafer’s
(1977:Fig. 4) description of Early Stemmed points. Long (1977) illustrated
Greenbriar Dalton points from the Beaumont beach area. This type usually is
regarded as transitional Paleoindian/Archaic (Goodyear, 1974). McGuff
and Cox (1973:21) reported Meserve and Lerma points in Harris County.
These points are from the transitional period (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:207).
Aside from projectile points, few other cultural remains are currently
available from the Early Archaic period. Both the Paleoinidan and Early Archaic appear to be periods of low density occupation in this region.
Evidence for occupation in this region during the Middle Archaic period
consists of projectile point types dated to this time period in Northcentral
Texas (Smith, 1969; McCormick, 1976; Suhm and Jelks, 1962). A general
characteristic of points from this time period is basal grinding. There is some
stratigraphic evidence for the early placement of these point types in Harris
County (Patterson, 1978b:3; Wheat, 1953: Table 5). Examples of these
point types for the upper Texas coast are: Carrollton (Duke, 1971; McClure,
1977:13; Patterson, in press a; 1978b:3; 1979a:Fig. 1; 1976c:173); Trinity
(Patterson, 1976c: 173, in press a); Williams (McClure, 1977:11; Patterson,
1976c:173, in press a); and Wells (Patterson, in press a).
The Bulverde point type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:169) may start early in
this time period, as in Central Texas (Prewitt, 1974:Fig. 7), but continues well
into later periods (Patterson, 1978b:3). There is some evidence that dart
points of the general Gary/Kent category may start in the Early to Middle
Archaic period (Wheat, 1953:Table 5; Patterson, 1978b:3). A Pedernales
point and bone tools were found in the lowest stratum of site 41AU36. Associated radiocarbon dates range from 4708 + 147 B.P. (TX-2453) to 3617 _+
126 B.P. (TX-2127), using the Arizona correction (Hall, 1978, 1979, in
press).
A large amount of data is now available for the Late Archaic period. This
period is immediately before the start of ceramics. Projectile point typology
for this period is summarized by Wheat (1953), McClurkan (1968), Shafer
(1968), and Patterson (1976c). Numerous sites with components of this time
period were published in the Houston Archeological Society Newsletter by
W. L. McClure and L. W. Patterson (Patterson, 1979a).
Typical dart points of this period are Gary, Kent, Ellis, Palmillas, Ensor,
Refugio, and Yarbrough. Many dart point types continue into the Ceramic
period (Wheat, 1953:Table 5). Group II burials of site 41AU36 (Hall, 1978,
1979, in press) fall into the Late Archaic, with radiocarbon dates from 2585
+ 124 B.P. (TX-2451) to 1639 + 81 B.P. (TX-2452). Fairland, Kent, and
miscellaneous expanding stem points were present in the burials.
The Late Archaic appears to be the start of intense use of many sites.
Large collections of lithic debitage are found on most sites of this time period,
indicating a high level of lithic manufacturing activity.

108

Texas Archeological Society

The term Woodland has been used for a number of years (Patterson,
1974a, 1976c) to define a time period for the upper Texas coast from the start
of ceramics to the start of predominant use of bifacial arrow points. Based on
Aten’s chronology (Aten, 1971:Fig. 10; Aten et al., 1976:Fig. 16), this period approximately dates from 1850 to 1350 B.P. Shafer (1975) defined a
Woodland period for the general area of East Texas in a similar manner.
Use of the term Woodland by Shafer (1975) and Patterson (1976c) does
not have universal acceptance. Gibson et al. (1978:27) criticized Shafer
(1975) for using this term, but failed to offer a better alternate. Use of the term
Woodland in Texas is entirely consistent with the definition of the Early
Woodland period throughout the eastern U.S. As Jennings (1974:213)
points out, it is generally defined as the arbitrary termination of the Archaic
period by the introduction of pottery. There are significant regional variations
in Woodland traits, but the Early Woodland reflects little general change from
the Late Archaic (Jennings, 1974:213; Ford, 1974:399~ Shafer, 1975; McKusick, 1964:80).
Most Late Archaic dart point types seem to continue into the Woodland
period. Some dart point types, such as Gary and Kent, tend to become
smaller (Patterson, 1976c:173) similar to changes in Louisiana (Ford and
Webb, 1956). Elam type points (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:185) occur in Late
Archaic and Woodland context in Harris County (Patterson, 1977a, 1977b).
This period is somewhat later than the time range of 6,000 to 4,000 B.P.
given by McCormick (1976:44) for this type in Northcentral Texas. Wheat
(1953:Table 5) showed Elam-like points in both pre-ceramic and postceramic contexts.
Tight chronological sequences are not possible for dart point types in the
Late Archaic and Woodland due to long time periods of use of most types. A
term such as "Ceramic Archaic" could be used in place of Woodland for the
upper Texas coast. Woodland period point types are summarized in Wheat
(1953), McClurkan (1968), Shafer (1968), and Patterson (1976c).
Aten et al. (1976:Fig. 16) established a ceramic sequence for the Galveston Bay area. Early types include Goose Creek Stamped, Tchefuncte, and
Conway Plain (coarse sand tempered). Goose Creek Plain sandy paste pottery is found throughout the entire sequence. San Jacinto sherd tempered
pottery and bone tempered pottery occur in the Late Prehistoric.
The Galveston Bay ceramic sequence has limited applicability for the
entire upper Texas coast. For example, many sites in inland Harris County
have only Goose Creek Plain pottery, regardless of age (Patterson, field
notes). This situation has little diagnostic value other than indicating ceramic
occupations. On the other hand, the lack of uniformity of ceramic sequences
in inland Harris County is illustrated by Wheat (1953:184) who found sherd
tempered pottery in the upper levels of only one of eight sites. This situation
could indicate non-uniform contacts with coastal margin Indians.
Other studies of ceramic sequences were made by Aten and Bollich
(1969) and Ambler (1967) for parts of the upper Texas coast on the coastal
margin. The extreme eastern end of the upper Texas coast has a sequence of
ceramics somewhat related to Louisiana (Aten and Bollich, 1969). There are
not enough variations in ceramic types in this region to give the ordered type
of chronological sequences that were possible in Louisiana. One local difference from the Galveston Bay ceramic sequence is that inland Harris

Patterson - Upper Texas Coast

109

County sites have earlier occurrences of bone tempered pottery in the
Woodland period (Patterson, 1976c, 1977c, 1978b).
C. N. Bollich (personal communication) concurs that inland Harris
County ceramics do not always demonstrate the full Galveston Bay sequence. The inland areas may not have received as much cultural influence
from Louisiana as the coastal margin of the upper Texas coast. Mobile hunting and gathering people would not give as much importance to ceramics as
people gathering food from more localized marine resources.
Harris County inland sites lack large amounts of pottery. Incised decoration is not as important as at littoral sites within 50 to 100 mi distance. Pottery
is not very portable. The Archaic hunters and gatherers of Central Texas
started pottery use even later than on the upper Texas coast (Prewitt,
1974:Table 7).
The Allens Creek site complex (Hall, 1978, 1979, in press) is an exception to inland sites lacking the full Galveston Bay ceramic sequence. Grant
Hall (personal communication) feels that the Allens Creek ceramic sequence
is a good match for Galveston Bay and could be an indication of seasonal
rounds by coastal margin Indians. Allens Creek site 41AU37 showed a trend
of more San Jacinto sherd tempered pottery in later time, similar to the
Galveston Bay sequence. Zone 3, dated to 1044 + 68 B.P. (TX-2125), had
only a few San Jacinto sherds, while Zone 1, dated to 466 + 88 B.P. (TX2126), had an equal number of Goose Creek and San Jacinto sherds (Hall,
personal communication).
The Late Prehistoric period started some time after 1650 B.P. It is characterized by the predominant occurrence of small, bifacial arrow points, usually
weighing under 2 gm (Patterson, 1976c:Fig. 4). The predominant use of
arrow points definitely starts after the introduction of ceramics in this region
(Wheat, 1953:Fig. 23; Aten, 1971:Fig. 10). Typical arrow point types found
in this region include Perdiz, Scallorn, Fresno, Catahoula, and Cliffton (Patterson, 1976c:Table 4). Other types occurring with less frequency are Alba,
Bassett, and Bonham. Some small Gary/Kent type dart points still occur
during the Late Prehistoric (Wheat, 1953:Table 5).
Prewitt (1974:Fig. 7) showed that Scallorn arrow points preceded Cliffton
and Perdiz types in Central Texas. There is no evidence that this also occurs
on the upper Texas coast. Wheat (1953:Table 5) showed Perdiz points even
earlier than Scallorn points in Harris County, a situation supported by the
early occurrence of Perdiz type points at site 41HR315 (Patterson, 1978b).
Many inland sites show less use of pottery in the Late Prehistoric than in
the Woodland period (Patterson, 1976c:Fig. 3); but this does not seem to
apply to sites on the coastal margin. Many Late Prehistoric sites do not show
much variety in material remains. The use of sherd tempering in ceramics
occurs on some sites during the Late Prehistoric. Archeological remains do
not allow a very detailed regional cultural interpretation of the Late Prehistoric
period.
Wheat (1953:Fig. 73) and Aten (1971:Fig. 10) assumed that the predominant occurrence of small projectile points demonstrated the introduction
of the bow and arrow in this region. This assumption is the usual one made
when archeological remains of bows and arrows are unavailable. However,
there is evidence that the bow and arrow started much earlier on the upper
Texas coast. The large number but limited types of small, bifacial arrow points

110

Texas Archeological Society

that predominate from the start of the Late Prehistoric indicate greater emphasis on use of the bow and arrow and use of more uniform technology.
In summary, there is evidence for human occupation of the upper Texas
coast for a period of approximately 12,000 years. Some sites show occupation sequences of 5,000 to 7,000 years, from the Early or Middle Archaic
until historic time. Some examples of long occupation sequences are site
41HR73 (Duke, 1971), site 41HR89 (McClure, 1977), site 41HR206 (Patterson, in press a), site 41HR315 (Patterson, 1978b), and the Doering site
(41HR5; Wheat, 1953).

REGIONAL STATISTICS
A review was made in late 1977 of TARL site files for this region
(Table I). While 1,641 sites were recorded, only 486 (30%) can be given
chronological classification. These statistics should be considered as approximate, as detailed data are not always recorded. Sites shown as Paleoindian
are actually Late Paleoindian or Early Archaic, with no exact occupational
data available on the earlier Clovis period. Archaic, Woodland, and Late
Prehistoric sites are also tabulated; breakdowns of single component and
multicomponent sites are given. The component totals for each time period
are probably the most significant data presented.
Not enough data are available to distinguish between various phases of
the Archaic period in most cases. Late Archaic sites are most numerous,
based on projectile point typology. Shafer (1974:7) noted large amounts of
archeological materials for the Late Archaic in East Texas. There is rapid
growth in the number of sites from the Late Paleoindian/Early Archaic into
the Middle to Late Archaic. This is interpreted as a continuous trend over the
subject time interval.
The number of occupations continue to increase in the Woodland and
Late Prehistoric periods. The increase in the number of archeological sites
with time is a clear trend, not just the result of sampling bias. Late Archaic sites
are actually easier to find than Late Prehistoric ones, due to the type and large
amounts of lithic debitage on Late Archaic sites. A more intense use of the
upper Texas coast seems to be indicated as time progresses. How this affected
aboriginal lifestyles is not yet clear.
The reasons why there are a relatively large number of multicomponent
sites is not obvious. In most cases, there are few presently obvious physical
reasons for reuse of sites rather than camping at nearby locations of similar
terrain. Many multicomponent sites probably did not have successive yearly
occupations to explain site uses as an habitual pattern. One explanation for
site reuse over long time periods may be the reuse of lithic debitage, since
lithic materials are not naturally available in much of this region (Patterson, in
press b). In almost all cases, recorded sites are associated with some body of
water, even if only a small stream.
Counties with the largest number of recorded sites generally reflect a
greater amount of survey work done rather than true site densities. The variations in numbers of recorded sites for each county (Table 1) illustrates the
need for more uniform regional surveys. The large number of unclassified
sites shows the need for more thorough study and improved detail in site
reporting (Patterson, 1979b).

Patterson -- Upper Texas Coast

111

=+6

&

I~°~°°~°°~°~’~°°~uoc~r"~’-~a~co~~
~oc~
c~
,¢co
I o~ I~
co

o

I~~co~~~°~~~
~

LO
CO

E
0

D

~1~00000~0~000000~0

eq

~

I

a’,

o~l

~oI

0

5
o)

o
~ooooooco~ooooo~ooooo

~L

<

J

00I

0
o

<

r-

co

~0

H

/<1~°°~°~’°~°°°~’~o~o~

o

0

~=o
0

o~

E

,E

_

112

Texas Archeological Society

Of all sites recorded, 476 (29%) are shell middens. A shell midden is an
accumulation of shellfish remains. Remains of Rangia cuneata (brackish water shellfish) are most common. Some middens consist of oyster shells. There
are some middens that have both oyster and Rangia shells, reflecting changes
in water salinity at a given location. Shell midden sites are concentrated in 8
coastal margin counties (Table 2).
There are few shell midden sites recorded with evidence of pre-ceramic
occupation components. This early paucity is interpreted as reflecting increasing cultural influence from the east along the coastal margin in later time.
Shell midden sites in southern Louisiana are similar in nature and seem to
reflect the same general subsistence pattern (Patterson, field notes). As a
parallel example, Ford (1974:398) noted that shellfish did not become an
important subsistence item on the East coast until the Late Archaic. Aten et al.
(1976"Fig. 16) seemed to infer that coastal margin adaptations were not
significant before 3850 B.P.
It could be argued that early shell midden sites are now under water due to
coastal subsidence. However, this does not explain the small number of Late
Archaic coastal midden sites. Gagliano (1977:1) pointed out that the Gulf
coastline was not greatly affected by coastal subsidence from about 3,500
B.P. to modern times. Modern subsidence and coastal erosion probably have
put some shell midden sites under water in recent time. However, there is
much marshland area not subject to shoreline subsidence that does not show
much pre-ceramic use of shellfish resources.

SUBSISTENCE PATTERNS
The prehistoric occupation sequence of the upper Texas coast is characterized by a nomadic hunting and gathering lifeway which continued essentially unchanged for thousands of years (Willey, 1966:329-337; Jelks,
1978:100). This general concept appears valid but does not account for
changes in localized marine adaptations. Few detailed subsistence studies are
published and the exact nature of seasonal subsistence patterns remains unknown.
Dillehay (1975) published a detailed study of subsistence for the lower
Trinity River. Wheat (1953:Table 8) gave details of faunal remains over a
long time period in Harris County. Deer and land turtle constitute the most
numerous faunal remains on many inland sites of all ages (Patterson, field
notes). Other animals typically available were rabbit, squirrel, racoon, opossum, wolf, and bear. Wheat (1953:Table 8) showed some use of buffalo; but
availability was subject to herd migrations and use was not continuous.
Inland sites do not show much use of freshwater shellfish (Wheat,
1953:237), although this resource presently exists near many known sites.
Large amounts of waterfowl are seasonably available. While plant foods were
probably important, remains are generally unavailable. Plant food processing
can be inferred from a few metates in Late Archaic/Woodland context on
inland Harris County sites, such as 41HR315 (Patterson, 1978b:3).
Marine adapted sites in the littoral and marsh areas present a contrast to
the inland coastal plain generalized hunting and gathering pattern. The most
frequent marine adapted site is the Rangia shell midden; oysters were used at

Patterson - Upper Texas Coast

113

some locations (Dillehay, 1975). A number of published reports are available
for marine adapted sites in this region (Aten, 1971; O’Brien, 1971; Ambler,
1967; Gilmore, 1974; Shafer, 1966).
Many shell middens are quite large and represent a significant use of
shellfish as a food source over long time periods. Some shell middens are
large enough to use NASA satellite photographs to identify this type of site in
Terrebonne Parrish in south Louisiana, with later verification by surface survey (Patterson, field notes). NASA photograph enlargements produce sharp
ground details.
Aten (1971) showed evidence (projectile points, deer bones, and a barb
of a compound fishhook) of hunting and fishing activities on a shell midden
site in Brazoria County. Deer bones seem to be frequently found on shell
midden sites given in unpublished TARL site records.
Dillehay (1975:30) identified fish and alligator as heavily used food
sources on shell middens in the lower Trinity River delta. The total number of
types of faunal remains was quite extensive (Dillehay, 1975:Appendix 4).
Both Rangia and oysters were present as shellfish food sources. Thus, many
shell midden sites seem to be characterized as having principally marine
adapted subsistence patterns with some hunting activities present.
It has not been accurately determined to what extent Indians using coastal
shell midden sites also seasonally used other inland sites. The accounts of
Cabeza de Vaca (Covey, 1961) indicated that at least some Indians did not
spend the entire year at coastal margin sites. Coastal margin sites in this region
tend to have much more pottery and fewer lithics compared to inland sites
(Patterson, 1976c: 171). The presence of large amounts of pottery at some
coastal margin sites could possibly indicate fairly long occupation periods,
although not necessarily a completely sedentary existence.
A more mobile life style may have occurred during the Late Prehistoric at
inland locations in this region. In a study of a 10 sq mi area in inland Harris
County (Patterson, 1976c), it was noted that sites became smaller and more
frequent in the Late Prehistoric. The decreased use of pottery in the Late
Prehistoric also supports the concept of a more mobile lifestyle.
Two contrasting theories may be examined to explain a trend to a more
mobile lifeway, both connected to subsistence patterns. Cohen (1977:83)
proposed that people may settle down to agriculture or become more mobile
to obtain food when population pressures increase. Agriculture may not have
been a viable subsistence option for the upper Texas coast (O’Brien and
Spencer, 1976). On the other hand, Dillehay (personal communication) offered the explanation that as people live longer in a given area, they may learn
to schedule utilization of natural food resources more efficiently and adopt a
more mobile lifeway to take advantage of this experience.
The study of subsistence activities on archeological sites is limited by the
poor preservation of wood, fiber, bone, skin, and shell materials. Remains of
shelters and wood tools at campsites are unavailable. Bone and antler tools
and projectile points were found at a number of sites at both inland (Wheat,
1953) and coastal margin (Aten, 1971) locations. Bone and antler tools could
have been used as awls, flaking tools, and crude knives.
Even though types of material remains are limited, some types of subsistence activities can be inferred from archeological collections. Hunting activities are shown by the occurrence of many projectile points. Lithic toolmaking

114

Texas Archeological Society

I.)

~2
r~

o

~

u

0~000000~

~

.

~d
.o

E

8

z
u

o9

cL

D
E
E
co
0
~’~

~"~

~

~

~

o

Patterson - Upper Texas Coast

115

and/or repair is almost universal at all campsites of all ages, as evidenced by
the debitage found. There is also widespread evidence of heat treating of flint
to improve knapping quality. This pretreatment would have been a necessity
for tough alluvial cherts from the nearest lithic sources (Patterson, 1979c).
Indians of this region did not produce many bifacial tools other than projectile points. Shafer (1974) noted that the generalized flake tool was important throughout East Texas. Wear patterns on utilized flakes (Tringham et al.,
1974) for cutting and scraping functions are common. Butchery, hide preparation, and woodworking activities can be inferred. Some sandstone abrading
tools are also found.
Remains of fire hearths, mainly of baked earth and clay, are found at
some campsites (Patterson, 1978b, in press a). Fired clay balls are common in
the Late Archaic and Woodland periods (Aten, 1967:39; Ambler,
1967:Table 3; Shafer, 1968:74; Patterson, 1976c: 183) and imply some type
of cooking activities (Gibson, 1975).

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES
Although a rather uniform lifeway seems to have persisted, some technological changes occurred, such as changes in projectile point types and lithic
procurement patterns, increasing use of the bow and arrow in later time, and
introduction of ceramics. These changes did not seem to alter basic life styles
for the hunters and gatherers of East Texas (Shafer, 1974). Intense use of
pottery on coastal margin sites probably indicates changes in subsistence activities.
Many technological traits were stable over long time periods (Patterson,
1976c:183). Some of these traits include use of bone tools, flake gravers,
notched tools, small prismatic blades, generalized flake tools, and heat treating of chert. For any given time period, the quality of lithic craftmanship was
highly variable. While examples are present, bifacial tools other than projectile points do not seem to be an important item during any time period.
Lithic resources are generally scarce on the upper Texas coast and some
changes in lithic procurement patterns appear to have developed over time
(Patterson, in press b). These changes include a more selective choice of raw
material sizes brought to campsites and possibly more reuse of debitage at
campsites from previous occupations. As projectile points became smaller in
later time, it would have become easier to find suitable lithic raw materials
from the large flakes left from previous occupations. Also, practically no large
chert pieces were imported to campsites in late occupation periods.
There is evidence (Patterson, 1973a, 1976c), including formal excavation
in Harris County (Patterson, 1978b), to indicate use of the bow and arrow on
the upper Texas coast earlier than usually accepted and a long period of
concurrent use of the atlatl. Small Gary/Kent type points, weighing 2 to 3
gm, may be transitional arrow points, adapted from dart point morphology
(Patterson, 1973b, 1976c). These types are found in Harris County (Patterson, 1978b) at least as early as the start of ceramics (1850 B.P.), compared to
the later start of the general occurrence of bifacial arrow points (approximately 1350 B.P.).

116

Texas Archeological Society

Small unifacial points of the type described by Patterson and Sollberger
(1974) are found (Patterson, 1973a, 1976c, 1978, in press a) as early as the
Late Archaic. These unifacial points generally weigh about 1 gm and are
shaped by shallow marginal retouch.
Dates for the earliest use of the bow and arrow in other parts of Texas also
seem to be becoming earlier. Hughes (1978:187) gave an early radiocarbon
date of 1830 + 60 B.P. (SI-1900) for small bifacial arrow points in the Texas
Panhandle. He also pointed out (personal communication) that this full developed technology must have started even earlier. This technology perhaps
corresponds to early use of the bow and arrow in the Great Basin. Dates are as
early as 3200 + 140 B.P. (GaK1564) at Hogup Cave (Aiken, 1970:184)
and 2630 + 110 B.P. (RL-109) at Swallow Shelter (Dalley, 1977:71).
Another indication of possible early use of the bow and arrow is the early
presence of a fully developed microblade industry. This presence may indicate concurrent diffusion of small blade technology and the bow and arrow
from the far north (Patterson, 1973a). It is not likely that a definite microblade
industry occurs for casual reasonst The Indians would have made microblades for specific uses. Retouched microblades indicate use as single and
compound elements of arrow points.
While the use of the bow and arrow became predominant in the Late
Prehistoric, the atlatl was not totally replaced. Wheat (1953:Table 5) showed
the occurrence of dart points throughout the Late Prehistoric. Hudson
(1976: 76,116) noted some use of the spear thrower into historic times along
the Gulf coast. As a parallel example, Cressman (1977:106) noted that the
atlatl was not suddenly replaced by the bow and arrow in the Great Basin.

NON-UTILITARIAN ASPECTS
Few details are available on the non-utilitarian aspects of prehistoric lifeways in this region. Nomadic peoples do not leave many sophisticated
cultural remains. Also, many decorative and ceremonial items probably were
made from perishable materials such as wood, shell, and bone. Campsites of
all ages have particularly few non-utilitarian cultural remains. Information
comes mainly from the few known mortuary sites.
Occasionally, campsites in Harris County yielded a few bone pendants
and beads (McClure, 1978:Fig. 30) and drilled stone pendants (Patterson, in
press a). Red ochre is fairly common at Harris County campsites of Late
Archaic and Early Woodland ages (Patterson, 1978b:3). Wheat (1953:Table
6) noted the occurrence of paint pigments over a wide time range. The occurrence of small smooth pebbles is almost universal on campsites of all ages in
Harris County (Patterson, field notes). These may have been used in gourd
and turtle shell rattles (Aten et al., 1976:41).
Mortuary sites in this region show that the Indian’s life did have some
ceremonial and recreational aspects beyond the level of bare subsistence activities. The most detailed publication of a mortuary site is by Aten et al.
(1976) for mainly Woodland period burials in Harris County. Non-utilitarian
grave goods include bone dice, birdbone flutes, incised bone, shell and bone
beads, and a shell pendant.
The Late Prehistoric Jamaica Beach site on Galveston Island (Aten et al.,
1976:75) had burials with bone beads, a drilled canine tooth pendant, and an

Patterson -- Upper Texas Coast

117

incised bone pendant. Current work at Mitchell Ridge site 41GV66 on
Galveston Island yielded many Late Prehistoric burials but few grave goods
(Bruce, ms.). The Shell Point site in Brazoria County (Hole and Wilkinson,
1973) yielded shell beads and a shell pendant in Late Prehistoric burials.
Hall (in press) presents details of a large mortuary complex in Austin
County. Although there were burials from Middle Archaic to Late Prehistoric,
most non-utilitarian grave goods were associated with the Late Archaic. items
included were a ground stone gorget, large ceremonial corner tanged knives,
shell pendants, shell beads, stingray spines, jasper pebbles, and ground stone
boatstones.
The small physical size of most archeological sites in this region infers that
the usual social structure was one or more extended families operating as
roving bands. Little class distinction can be inferred from the burials. Site
41AU36 (Hall, 1978, 1979, in press) gave evidence of violent conflict in the
Late Archaic, with several individuals killed by dart points.
Although ethnographic accounts of this region sometimes mention the
possibility of cannabalism, there is little prehistoric evidence for this practice.
Some human teeth were found mixed with deer teeth and bones on site
41HR244 in Harris County (Patterson, 1979d). This occurrence might indicate cannabalism. However, as this is a rare find, cannabalism, if practiced at
all, was not a frequent occurrence.

EXTERNAL RELATIONSHIPS
While a conservative hunting and gathering lifeway persisted on the upper Texas coast throughout prehistory, outside influences are detectable.
Evidence of outside influences probably reflects the contact possibilities of a
wide ranging nomadic lifeway. The projectile point types of the Paleoindian
and Early Archaic periods are part of a wide distribution throughout North
America (Wormington, 1957).
Middle Archaic dart point types in this region are found in adjacent areas
to the north (Smith, 1969; McCormick, 1976), east (Gagliano, 1967), and
Edwards Plateau (Prewitt, 1974). The Late Archaic projectile points are
characteristic of adjacent regions (Suhm and Jelks, 1962).
Patterson (1975) noted that most point types that occur in the Late Archaic in Louisiana are also found on the upper Texas coast. The Ponchartrain
dart point is especially characteristic of Louisiana and occurs in this region
(Patterson, 1978b; McClurkan, 1968). Ellis and Gary/Kent point types
found on the upper Texas coast have wide distributions in other parts of
eastern North America (Suhm and Jelks, 1962).
In the Late Prehistoric period, arrow points found in this region have wide
distributions in East (Shafer, 1974) and Central (Prewitt, 1974) Texas.The
Catahoula arrow point (Patterson, 1976d) has wide distribution to the northeast of this region. Toyah arrow points found in Harris County (Patterson,
1976c) show possible Late Prehistoric contact with the southwest, possibly
through the so-called Gilmore Corridor (Kreiger, 1948).
Edwards Plateau chert (Georgetown and Belton Lake) is fairly common
at sites in this region (Patterson, in press b). Hall (1978, 1979, in press) felt
that the large corner tanged knives found in Austin County came from the

118

Texas Archeological Society

Edwards Plateau and that ground stone objects were from the Ouachita
Mountains in Arkansas.
Bone tempered pottery found as early as the Woodland period on the
upper Texas coast may show Caddoan influences (Dee Ann Story, personal
communication) from the north. Shafer (1968) and McClurkan (1968) found
some Caddoan pottery types from sites on the northern edge of this region.
Caddoan influences over the entire region, however, do not appear to be
strong.
The strongest influence on ceramic types of the upper Texas coast appears to be from Louisiana. There are a few examples of the early Tchefuncte
type~(Aten et al., 1976) and many examples of later Coles Creek incised
designs (Aten and Bollich, 1969). While ceramics were probably introduced
from Louisiana, the main pottery style in this region is the local Goose Creek
Plain with sandy paste.
Pottery found on the upper Texas coast is generally not well made° It
probably illustrates the transmission of a general idea rather than specific
manufacturing techniques that produced the well made pottery types of Louisiana~ Rockport type pottery from the central Texas coast is found occasionally (Shafer, 1968:Fig. 34).
The use of small prismatic blade technology seems to start sometime in
the last half of the Archaic and was widespread along the entire Gulf coast
(Patterson, 1973a). This technology may be ultimately derived from the far
north. Prismatic blade technologies are widely distributed in Texas (Patterson, 1974b).

SUMMARY
Presently available evidence shows that there probably has been at least
12,000 years of prehistoric occupation on the upper Texas coast. A conservative hunting and gathering lifeway continued throughout the prehistoric
period, with technological changes having little effect on the basic pattern.
Detectable external influences do not seem to have had much effect on lifestyle.
This region is no longer archeologically unknown. An extensive literature
has evolved recently (Patterson, 1979a) and many archeological sites are
recorded for each county. There is a need for more extensive survey of the
entire region on a more uniform basis. Not all counties are equally well
known.
Detailed syntheses of subsistence and settlement patterns remain as future research goals. Seasonal patterns have not yet received much study. The
possible relationships of coastal margin and inland sites is not well understood. More data are especially needed to obtain a better picture of the Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods.
Urbanization of the upper Texas coast is rapidly destroying many archeological resources, but little public funding has been provided for mitigation. The upper Texas coast also lacks a good regional museum for the proper
preservation of prehistoric information. Little is being done to put research
information into the public domain from current contract archeology for environmental impact work.

Patterson - Upper Texas Coast

119

REFERENCES CITED
Aikens, C. Melvin
1970
Hogup Cave. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, 93:1-286.
Ambler, J. Richard
1967

Three Prehistoric Sites Near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay Area. State
Building Commission, Archeology Program Report, 8:1-158.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1967
Excavations at the Jameson Site, Liberty County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society Report, 1:1- 71.
1971

Archeological Excavations at the Dow-Cleaver Site, Brazoria County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Technical Bulletin, 1:1-58.

Aten, Lawrence E. and Charles N. Bollich
1969
A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology for
the Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 40:241-258.
Aten, Lawrence E., Charles R. Chandler, AI B. Wesolowsky, and Robert M. Malina
1976
Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication, 3:1-112.
Bernard, H. A., C. F. Major Jr., B. S. Parrott, and R. J. LeBlanc Sr.
1970
Recent Sediments of Southeast Texas: A Field Guide to the Brazos Alluvial and Deltaic Plains and the Galveston Barrier Island Complex. University of Texas, Bureau of Economic Geology Guidebook, 11:1-16.

Bickley, G. W,
Scottsbluff at Red Bluff. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter,
1964
11:5.
Bruce, Barbara
ms.
Mitchell Ridge Site, Galveston Island, Texas. Manuscript in preparation.
Bryson, Reid A., David A. Baerreis, and Wayne M. Wendland
1970
The Character of Late-Glacial and Post-Glacial Climatic Changes. In:
Wakefield Dort Jr. and J. Knox Jones Jr. (eds.), Pleistocene and Recent
Environments of the Central Great Plains, pp. 53-74. University of Kan sas Press, Lawrence.
Campbell, T. N.
1958

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 29:177-254.

Cohen, Mark N.
1977
The Food Crisis in Prehistory. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Covey, Cyclone
1961

Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books, New York.

Cressman, Luther L.
1977
Prehistory of the Far West. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Dalley, Gardiner F.
1977

Swallow Shelter and Associated Sites. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, 96:1-179.

120

Texas Archeological Society

Dillehay, Tom D.
Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity River Delta,
1975
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 51:1-193.
Duke, A. R.
Analysis of Lithic Material from 41HR73. Houston Archeological So1971
ciety Newsletter, 36:3-6.
Fisher, W. L. J. H. McGowen, L. F. Brown Jr., and C. G. Groat
1972
Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone: GalvestonHouston Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas, Austin.
1973

Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone: BeaumontPort Arthur Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas,
Austin.

Ford, J. A. and C. H. Webb
Poverty Point. American Museum of Natural History, Anthropological
1956
Papers, 46(1):1-136.
Ford, Richard I.
Northeastern Archeology: Past and Future Directions. Annual Review of
1974
Anthropology, 3:385-413.
Gagliano, S. M.
1967
Occupation Sequence at Avery Island. Louisiana State University,
Coastal Studies Institute Report, 22:1-110.
1977

Cultural Resources Evaluation of the Northern Gulf of Mexico Continental Shelf. Cultural Resource Management Studies, Interagency Archeological Services, Washington, D.C.

Gibson, Jon k.
Fire Pits at Mount Bayou (16CT35), Catahoula Parish, Louisiana. Loui1975
siana Archeology, 2:201-218.

Gibson, Jon L., Robert B. Grambling, Charles R. Brassieur, Steven J. Brazda, and
1978

Steve G. Lark
An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Lower Sabine River Valley,
Toledo Bend Dam to Gulf Intracoastal Waterway, Louisiana and Texas.
University of Southwestern Louisiana, Center for Archeological Studies,
4:1-237.

Gilmore, Kathleen
1974
Cultural Variation on the Texas Coast: Analysis of an Aboriginal Shell
Midden, Wallisville Reservoir, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 44:1-108.
Goodyear, Albert C.
The Brand Site. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series, 7:11974
118.
Gunn, Joel and Frank A. Weir
1976
Tool Kit Hypotheses: A Case of Numerical Induction. Lithic Technology,
5(3):31-39.

Hall, Grant D.
Investigations at the Ernest Witte Site: A Retrospective Summary. Paper
1978
presented at the annual meeting of the Texas Archeological Society,
Corpus Christi.

Patterson - Upper Texas Coast

121

1979

Site 41AU36. Lecture given to the Houston Archeological Society,
Houston.

in press

Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos
River Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 61.

Hester, Thomas R.
ms.
A Survey of Late Pleistocene Archeological Remains Along the Texas
Coast. Manuscript on file at the Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas, San Antonio.
Hole, Frank and Richard G. Wilkinson
1973

Shell Point: A Coastal Complex and Burial Site in Brazoria County.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 44:5-50.

Hudson, Charles
1976
The Southeastern Indians. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.
Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
1978

Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Ofrice of the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report, 24:1-294.

Jackson, J. R.
1979
Comparison Between the Environmental and Cultural Impacts of Petroleum Operations with other Historic Users of the Outer Continental
Shelf. Exxon public letter (April 23), Houston.
Jelks, Edward B.
1978

Diablo Range. In: R. E. Taylor and C. W. Meighan (eds.), Chronologies
in New World Archeology, pp. 71-111. Academic Press, New York.

Jennings, Jesse D.
1974
Prehistory of North America (2nd edition). McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kreiger, Alex D.
1948
Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor" in the Culture Contacts Between
Middle America and the Eastern United States. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, 19:155-178.
Long, Russell J.
1977

McFaddin Beach. Lamar University, Spindletop Museum, Patillo Hig~
gins Series of Natural History and Anthropology, 1:1-37.

McClure, W. L.
1977
White Oak Bayou, 41HR89. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter,
55:9-17.
1978

White Oak Bayou, 41HR273. Houston Archeologieal Society Newsletter, 60:2-6.

McClurkan, Burney B.
1968
Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American Occupations. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 12:1-115.

McCormick, Olin F.
1976
The Archaic Period in North Central Texas. In" Thomas R. Hester (ed.),
The Texas Archaic: A Symposium. University of Texas at San Antonio,
Center for Archaeological Research, Special Report, 2:39-45.

122

Texas Archeological Society

McGuff, Paul R. and Wayne N. Cox
1973
A Survey of the Archeological and Historical Resources of Areas to be
Affected by the Clear Creek Flood Control Project, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 28:1-72.
Muller-Beck, H.
1967
On Migrations of Hunters Across the Bering Land Bridge in the Upper
Pleistocene. In: David M. Hopkins (ed.), The Bering Land Bridge, pp.
373-408. Stanford University Press, Stanford.
O’Brien, Michael J.
The Fullen Site, 41HR82. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
1971
42:335-361.

O’Brien, Michael J. and Calvin Spencer
The Upper Texas Coast: Environmental Variables and Human Adapta1976
tions. Texas Journal of Science, 27(4):453-463.
Patterson, L. W.
1973a Some Texas Blade Technology. Bulletin of the’Texas Archeological Society, 44:69-111.
1973b

A Possible Arrow Point Development Example. Texas Archeology,
17(3) :8-9.

1974a

A Harris County Woodland Site. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, 47:3-4.

1974b

Prisimatic Blade Distribution in Texas. La Tierra, I(1):9-14.

1975

The Poverty Point Culture, As Seen from Southeastern Texas. Louisiana
Archeology, 2:153-162.

1976a

Bibliography of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas ~oast. Houston Archeological Society Special Publication, 3:1-14.

1976b The Hillboldt Site, Austin County, Texas. La Tierra, 3(3):23-28.
1976c

Technological Changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 47:171-188.

1976d The Catahoula Point: A Distributional Study. Louisiana Archeology,
3:217-223.
1977a

Woodland - Late Prehistoric Site 41HR215, Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Newsletter, 57:6~8.

1977b

Three Late Sites in Harris County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter, 58:2-5.

1977c

An Archaic-Woodland Site 41HR223, Harris County, Texas. Houston
Archeological Society Newsletter, 56:4-7.

1978a

Research Deficiencies in Contract Archeology, under Environmental
Laws. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Los Angeles.

1978b

Preliminary Report on Site 41HR315, Harris County, Texas. Houston
Archeological Society Newsletter, 59:2-4.

1979a Bibliography of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Houston Archeological Society Special Publication, 4:1-18.

Patterson -- Upper Texas Coast

123

1979b Archeological Site Reporting. Texas Archeology, 23(1):14-15.
1979c

Experimental Heat Treating of Flint. La Tierra, 6(I):11-13.

1979d Harris County Site 41HR244 Revisited. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, 63:2-6.
in press a

41HR206, A Major Site in Harris County, Texas. University of Texas at
San Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Special Publication.

in press b

Lithic Procurement Strategies in Harris County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter, 64.

Patterson, L. W. and J. B. Sollberger
1974
Lithic Shaping Retouch. Texas Archeology, 18(3):13-16.
Patterson, Thomas C.
1973

America’s Past: A New World Archeology. Scott, Foresman and Co.,
Glenview.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1974

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 49:1-147.

Shafer, Harry J.
1966
An Archeological Survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Report, 2:1-43.
1968

Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin, Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
13:1-82.

1975

Archeology and Indians of Southeast Texas. In: Participants Handbook
on the Big Thicket, Contemporary Science Seminar. University of Houston and Houston Museum of Natural Science.

1975

Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 46:249-254.

1977

Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal, 17:187-197.

Smith, C. A. Jr.
1969
Archeology of the Upper Trinity Watershed. The Record, 26(1):1-14.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication, 1:1-299.

Tringham, Ruth, Glenn Cooper, George Odell, Barbara Voytek, and Anne Whitman
Experimentation in the Formation of Edge Damage: A New Approach.
1974
Journal of Field Archaeology, 1(1/2):171-196.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1955

The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin of the Bureau of American Ethnology,
154:143-252.

Willey, Gordon R.
1966

An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 1. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.

Wormington, H. M.
1957

Ancient Man in North America (4th edition). Denver Museum of Natural
History Popular Series, 4:1-322.

NOTES

ABSTRACT
Wear patterns on worked ceramic potsherds collected during a reconnaissance of the McGregor Guided Missile Range, south central New Mexico, show
that these artifacts served prehistoric potters as scraping and smoothing tools. The
wear pattern typology presents a methodology for determining patterns of use.
Ceramic types with hard paste (Chupadero Black-on-White and Mimbres Blackon-White) were preferred over other available types (mostly local El Paso
brownware) as the raw material for these scrapers. Potsherd scrapers were found
in proportionately greater quantities in village sites than in smaller, less complex
sites, indicating that villages were more often the location of pottery manufacture.
Potsherd scrapers show potential as useful indicators of ceramic manufacturing
activity on sites where archeological research is restricted to surface survey.

INTRODUCTION
Prehistoric inhabitants of the Southwest are known to have reused fragments of broken pottery vessels. These may be distinguished from ordinary
potsherds by the presence of ground edges or perforations and are usually
triangular, rectangular, or circular. These artifacts are usually refered to as
worked potsherds. Depending on their shapes, sizes, and wear patterns,
worked potsherds have been described as counters, gaming pieces, pendants, scrapers, scoops, spindle-whorls, or spoons. However, evidence to
substantiate these interpretations is often lacking or incomplete. In an effort to
bring attention to this class of artifacts, direct evidence is provided for interpreting the function of a large sample of one type of worked sherd from
McGregor Guided Missile Range, south-central New Mexico.
McGregor Range is located directly north of El Paso, Texas, in Otero
County, New Mexico (Fig. I). This range forms a large portion of the lower
Tularosa Basin. It also constitutes a large part of the southern Jornada
Branch, a prehistoric cultural area which is the southeasternmost expression
of the Mogollon sequence. The appearance of El Paso Brown marked the
beginning of the Ceramic period, around A.D. 500. The Ceramic period
developed in the Mesilla Phase (ca. A.D. 900-1100) and reached its peak,
involving a brisk ceramic trade with outside areas, in the Dona Ana Phase (ca.
A.D. 1100-1200) and the following El Paso Phase (ca. A.D. 1200-1400).

126

Texas Archeological Society

Texas Archeological Survey (TAS) performed a surface survey of McGregor Range in order to assess its archeological resource potential (Beckes and
Dibble, in press). A representative sample of nearly 22,000 ceramic sherds
and other artifacts was collected for further study. At each of 264 sites bearing
ceramics, an effort was made to collect all ceramic types present (Smiley,
1977, 1978).
Of the 126 worked sherds collected on McGregor Range, 125 appear to
have served prehistoric potters as scraping and smoothing tools. Unlike many
described specimens, these tools are rarely smoothed on all edges and usually
have only one, two, or three facets (Fig. 2). However, this characteristic may
be a result of post-use breakage.
Reusing potsherds as ceramic scrapers was a common practice in most
areas and phases of the prehistoric Southwest. Examples are abundant in
reports from the Anasazi (Morris, 1939:167; Smith, 1952:147; Judd,
1954:228) and Mogollon culture areas (Haury, 1936:28; Martin and
Rinaldo, 1950:352; Wheat, 1955:108; Martin et al., 1957:84). Evidence
from the Hohokam area is scanty (Gladwin et al., 1937:243; Haury,
1976:251).
In the immediate area of the Jornada Branch, sherd scrapers (Lehmer,
1948:31), and sherd spoons and scoops (Marshall, 1973:61), were noted.
Unfortunately, lack of information about worked sherds in reports often precludes an interpretation as to their use.

F-

N

R

20
0 5 I0
I
[ I ~
MILES

Fig. I Location map for McGregor Guided Missile Range.

50
,,]

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

127

Ethnographic information suggests that sherds were used traditionally in
the Southwest for scraping and smoothing walls of leather-hard, or sun-dried,
ceramic vessels before their final firing (Guthe, 1925:54; Colton, 1953:9).
This procedure is done in order to scrape and smooth away bumps and coil
marks and thin vessel walls. Pieces of gourd also are known to be used as
scrapers and shapers when the clay is still wet and plastic (Guthe, 1925:27;
Colton, 1953:11).

ANALYSIS OF ARTIFACTS
After determining that the 125 worked sherds were ceramic vessel scrapers, an analysis of their use was performed. In describing wear patterns, the

Ca)

Cc)

(d)

(b)
0

I,

5

I

10

I

cffl

Fig. 2 Examples of ceramic scrapers: a) and b) Chupadero Black-on-White; c) and d)
Mimbres Black-on-White.

Texas Archeological Society

128

term facet refers to the smoothed edge of a sherd as seen from either interior
or exterior surface. Bevel refers to the angle of the facet, either towards the
exterior or interior sherd surface. The basic types of ceramic scrapers found
on the McGregor Range survey and their probable pattern of use are shown in
Figure 3. These patterns are:
A.

CONVEX FACET, EXTERIOR BEVEL. This sherd has a convex
facet beveled towards the exterior surface. This condition results from
the potter holding it at an angle, fingers on the concave or interior
surface, thumb on the exterior surface. The wear pattern results from
scraping or smoothing the interior of a vessel in a motion towards the
potter’s body.

B,

CONVEX FACET, FLAT OR ROUNDED EDGE SURFACE (NO
BEVEL). The flat wear pattern is made by holding the sherd at a 90°
angle to the interior wall of a clay vessel while scraping. A rounded
surface results when the tool is used at a slight angle on both sides of
the facet.

C.

CONVEX FACET, INTERIOR BEVEL. This wear pattern is a result
of the sherd being held in a manner opposite to type A; fingers are on
the convex or exterior surface and thumb on the interior surface. This
type of sherd is used to scrape the interior of the vessel.

D. CONVEX FACET, INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR BEVEL. Both sides
of the ceramic tool are used in shaping the interior of a vessel.
E.

CONCAVE FACET, EXTERIOR BEVEL. The ceramic tool is held as
in Type A, but is used to scrape the exterior, convex surface of a clay
vessel.
Of the 125 ceramic scrapers, 54 of El Paso Brown were unavailable for
further analysis. Seventy-one scrapers of other ceramic types were carefully
examined. Of the wear patterns, Type A (convex facet, exterior bevel, used
to scrape the interior of a vessel) is by far the most common.
Chupadero Black-on-White sherds usually have steeply bevelled facets,
since they have a harder and finer grained paste than other types (Fig. 4a).
Because El Paso Polychrome is quite friable, these sherd scrapers generally
have round or flat edges with little angled bevel (Fig. 4b).
Scrapers range between 2 to 9 cm in their maximum diameter and
average 4 cm. This size is easily held between the fingers. However, some
artifacts must have been abandoned because they were worn down to an
impractically small size. Many scrapers have more than one facet~ or were
used by the potter at more than one angle (Type B). Potters probably used
several different sherd scrapers in fashioning one vessel, different surfaces
requiring variously shaped tools.
Facet shapes are either concave or convex, indicating repeated contact
with curved surfaces to produce a ground edge. They were probably prepared for use by chipping and then grinding on something hard such as a
stone or a fired ceramic surface. In ethnographic studies of the modern
pueblos, potsherd scrapers were prepared for use by rubbing on coarse sandstone (Guthe, 1925:54). These procedures would roughly shape them for
their function as a tool and usage would later produce the smooth curved
facets observed on the artifacts.

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

129

Ceramic Types Employed
Table I compares the number of scrapers of each ceramic type against the
total number of sherds of that type found on McGregor Range. This enables
one to statistically test differences in the proportion of scrapers for each type.
The G test, a statistical test much like Chi Square, was used for these compari-

(b)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 3 Types of ceramic scrapers and probable patterns of use.

130

Texas Archeological Society

sons (Sokal and Rohlf, 1973:293). By using this statistical test, unevenness in
collection techniques is rendered inconsequential.
Results indicate a preference for specific ceramic types as the raw material
for scrapers. For example, of 1,587 Chupadero Black-on-White sherds collected, 37 (.02%) were ceramic scrapers, a higher number than would be
expected if these artifacts were randomly distributed among all ceramic types.
A similar result was obtained for Mimbres Classic Black-on-White. Probably
the greater hardness and strength of these pottery types contributed to their
preference. It is also possible that because of their bright coloration, these
types were less easily misplaced and consequently were prefered.
In proportion to their total representation, El Paso Brown and El Paso
Polychrome, the local wares, are under-represented as ceramic scrapers.
This locally manufactured brownware is less than ideally suited for tools because of its friable nature and may account for its under-representation. Three
Rivers Red-on-Terracotta may or may not have been preferred for vessel
scrapers. There is too little evidence for a statistical analysis.
When scrapers of pottery types appearing in trace amounts (less than I%)
are analyzed as a group (Jornada Brown, Playas Red [Plain variety], unidentified plainware, other types), they are shown by the G test to be neither
significantly under nor over-represented.
Probably Chupadero and Mimbres Black-on-White potsherds were most
highly preferred for ceramic scrapers. In their absence, types such as Jornada
Brown, Gila Polychrome, and Playas Red were used; local El Paso
Brownware was the material of last resort.
In a situation where chronology is better controlled, as in excavation, a
more precise interpretation can be made as to popularity of various ceramic
types for scrapers at a given point in time. The analyzed types span the entire
Ceramic period for this area, approximately A.D. 500-1400. Conclusions as
to what ceramic types were employed at any given time cannot be made.
Therefore, preferences shown for particular ceramic types are general for the
entire period.

Ca)

Cb)

Hg. 4 Prof!lesofceramicscrape~:a)scraper withsteep bevel;b)scraper withshallow
bevel.

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

131

Table 1
Comparison by ceramic type of number of worked sherds with total number of
sherds collected
No. of
Worked Sherds
Ceramic Type
El Paso Brown

(A)

Comparison of (A) to (B)

(B)

54

15,395

Fewer than expected (88.13),
’p
.01

7

3,250

Fewer than expected (18.60)
p
.01

37

1,587

El Paso Polychrome

Chupadero Black on

Total No. of
Sherds Collected

More than expected (9.08)

White
Mimbres Classic Black
on White

p
22

549

2

232

Jorna Brown

p

Three Rivers Red on

.01

About the same as expected
(1.33), sample size too small

Terracotta

for G test

iI 61!

Playas Red (Plain

3

variety)

Unidentified Plainware
All other types

.01

More than expected (3.14)

90

823

Fewer than expected (4.71),
but sample size too small
for G test

226

0

446

125

12,836

"p = probability that the null hypothesis is true

Distribution of Scrapers
Table 2 shows the distribution of scrapers among various site types defined during the McGregor Range survey. Presumably, domestic tools used
for the manufacture of pottery vessels would be found in habitation sites.
Habitation sites defined on the survey are villages, complex camps, burned
rock loci, and rockshelters.
Villages show evidence of house remnants, substantial quantities of nonportable artifacts, extensive trash middens, and are at least three acres in
extent. These sites are presumed to have been permanent, residential communities. They are most abundant in the El Paso Phase (ca. A.D. 12001400). Sites of lesser size with no evidence of structures and fewer artifacts
and features are complex camps. These may have been ramada-type structures for temporary encampment.
Burned rock loci are relatively small sites (less than one acre), characterized by ring middens, large multiple use hearths, and some artifact scatter.
These sites most likely represent plant processing camps inhabited for short
periods. Evidence of habitation in rockshelters includes rock art, ceramic and
lithic scatters, hearths, and extensive ash middens (Beckes, 1977:117).
Through the use of the G-test, village sites were found to produce a
greater proportion of ceramic scrapers than would be expected if these scrapers were randomly dispersed in all site types yielding ceramic materials. Corn-

132

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2

Comparison by site type of number of worked sherds with total number of sherds
collected
No. of
Worked Sherds
Site Type

(A)

Total No. of
Sherds Collected
(B)

Comparisons of (A) to (B)
More than expected (64.88)

Villages

84

11,333

Complex Camps

32

7,995

Fewer than expected (45.77)
p
.01

8

2,014

Fewer than expected (11.53)
non-significant

1

351

Fewer than expected (2.83),
sample too small for G test

125

12,836

"p

Burned Rock Loci
(ceramic)
All other site types
(see text)

~01

"p = probability that the null hypothesis is true

plex camps show significantly fewer scrapers than expected from a purely
random distribution.
If the presence of ceramic scrapers is interpreted as direct evidence of
ceramic manufacturing, the occupants of both villages and complex camps
engaged in this activity. However, proportionately more scrapers are found in
village sites. Therefore, villages were probably habitation sites where the
greatest amount of ceramic manufacture took place. The presence of the
same ceramic types at both of these site types indicates that they were occupied in the same general period.
Burned rock loci produced fewer scrapers than expected if the distribution
was normal, but results are not statistically significant. Perhaps a very limited
amount of pottery making went on in these camps. One ceramic scraper was
found in a rockshelter, not enough evidence to create a pattern.
Ceramic site types which did not produce scrapers were isolated hearths,
ceramic/lithic scatters, and isolated ceramic scatters.

SUMMARY
Worked ceramic sherds from McGregor Range, New Mexico, were examined from a technological and functional point of view. Evidence such as
basic shape, size, wear facets, and ceramic types employed led to the conclusion that 125 out of 126 of these artifacts were used prehistorically to aid in the
scraping and smoothing of both interior and exterior surfaces of unfired
ceramic vessels. In addition, prehistoric potters in the Tularosa Basin area
probably preferred particular ceramic types to others (i.e., hard-pasted Chupadero and Mimbres Black-on-White) as the raw material for their scrapers.
An examination of the distribution of scrapers among different types of
sites showed that they appeared more frequently in village sites than in other,
smaller types of sites. If the presence of sherd scrapers on a site provides an
accurate indication of ceramic vessel manufacture, then villages were most

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

133

often the location for this activity. Because the material is readily available and
the tools easily manufactured, they would not be expected to travel long
distances from the location of their use.
Studying the spatial distribution of artifacts with known use, such as the
ceramic scrapers, can aid in determining variable prehistoric activity patterns.
For example, because the manufacture of pottery was not performed in every
type of site, presence or absence of ceramic manufacturing tools can be used
to interpret probable site specific activities. Further, the abundance of ceramic
scrapers in a site can be considered a clue to the amount of pottery making
that took place during the site’s history.
The ceramic types used for scrapers most likely changed over time. Excavation of sites containing these artifacts can bring chronological control to
this study. In addition, studies of wear patterning on ceramic scrapers can be
used to determine the sort of surfaces on which they were used, e.g., large
ollas with little curvature or small bowls with a great deal of curvature.
Ceramic scrapers possess three particular advantages that make them
potentially useful for archeological research. First, because they are ceramic,
they resist natural deterioration. A broken and weathered ceramic scraper is
still an identifiable artifact. Second, because they were abundantly made and
discarded, they are readily found in surface residues of sites which contain
them and can be found in surface surveys. Last, relic collectors will pass by all
but the most beautiful of these undistinguished artifacts. Many ceramic scrapers are distinguishable from ordinary sherds only upon close examination. As
a result of these factors, ceramic scrapers remain on the surface where discarded and provide a little disturbed source for archeological investigations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was made possible by contracts to the Texas Archeological Survey, University of
Texas at Austin, by the Fort Worth District Corps of Engineers. Thanks also go to David S. Dibble
and Alan Dulaney of TAS. Kitty Burton and John Smiley assisted with the manuscript.

REFERENCES CITED
Beckes, Michael R.
Prehistoric Cultural Stability and Change in the Southern Tularosa Ba1977
sin. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh.
Beckes, Michael R. and David S. Dibble
in press The Prehistoric Resource. In: Michael R. Beckes, David S. Dibble, and
Martha Doty Freeman, A Cultural Resource Inventory. An Assessment
of McGregor Guided Missile Range. Part I. The Cultural Resource Base.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 65.
Colton, Harold S.
1953
Potsherds, an Introduction to the Study of Prehistoric Southwestern
Ceramics and Their Use in Historic Reconstruction. Bulletin of the Museum of Northern Arizona, 25:1-86.
Gladwin, H. S., Emil W. Haury, E. B. Sayles, and Nora Gladwin
1937

Excavations at Snaketown, Material Culture. Medallion Papers, 25:1305.

134

Texas Archeological Society

Guthe, Carl E.
Pueblo Pottery Making. Yale University Press, New Haven.
1925
Haury, Emil W.
The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico. Medallion Papers,
1936
20:1-146.

1976

The Hohokam Desert Farmers and Craftsmen. Snaketown 1964-1965.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Judd, Neil M.
1954
The Material Culture of Pueblo Bonito. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 124:1-398.

Lehmer, Donald J.
1948
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Bulletin,
(2):I-97.
Marshall, M. p,
Background Information on the Jornada Branch Area. In: Human Sys1973
tems Research Technical Manual, Tularosa Basin Survey. Three Rivers,
New Mexico.
Martin, P. S. and John B. Rinaldo
Turkey Foot Ridge Site, A Mogollon Village, Pine Lawn Valley, Western
1950
New Mexico. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 38(2):1-396.
Martin, P. S., John B. Rinaldo, and Eloise R. Barter
Late Mogollon Communities, Four Sites of the Tularosa Phase, Western
1957
New Mexico. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 49(1):I-144.
Morris, Earl H.
Archaeological Studies in the La Plata District. Carnegie Institution of
1939
Washington, Washington, D.C.
Smiley, Nancy Kays
1977
Prehistoric Ceramics of McGregor Range. In: Michael R. Beckes, Alan
R. Dulaney, John D. Pigott, Robert F. Scott IV, and Nancy Kays Smiley,
A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of McGregor Guided
Missile Range. Part II. Special Archeological Studies. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 65:129-261.
1978

Prehistoric Ceramics of the Lower Tularosa Basin, Southeastern New
Mexico. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.

Sokal, Robert R. and F. James Rohlf
1973
Introduction to Biostatistics. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.
Smith, Watson
Excavations in Big Hawk Valley, Wupatki National Monument, Arizona.
1952
Bulletin of the Museum of Northern Arizona, 24:1-203.
Wheat, Joe Ben
Mogollon Culture Prior to A.D. 1000. American Anthropological Asso1955
ciation Memoir, 82:1-242.

Joseph B. Wilson
ABSTRACT
An extensive campsite in Fayette County (Texas) is located on a terrace
above Little Pin Oak Creek. This creek is a few miles north of the Colorado River.
The terrace consists of a clay base overlain by sand. The sand unit is approximately
one meter in depth, but varies due to depressions, ridges, and other features of the
clay. In February 1976, a test pit yielded a large Clovis point near the day base.
The point was evidently broken during manufacture. Its excellent, unabraded
condition indicates that it was not transported by stream action. Subsequently, a
connected, excavated area of 76 sq m yielded rock hearths, cores, preforms,
flakes, scrapers, gouges, Historic material, and approximately 30 spear points and
arrow points. Point types range from Paleoindian to Neo-American. The stratigraphy seems to be well preserved. Flaking debris occurred at the Paleoindian and
later levels. Indications are that the site is a stratified, multicomponent campsite.

INTRODUCTION
Site 41FY53 is located on a small farm in northwest Fayette County,
approximately three miles northwest of Winchester. It is on a sandy terrace
above Little Pin Oak Creek, about three miles north of the Colorado River.
The site runs along the creek for at least 300 m and is approximately 50 m
wide. Site elevation is approximately 100 m above sea level and about 10 m
above the creek bed. The sand is usually 1 m in depth. However, thickness
varies because of fluctuations in the clay base. Although not always flowing in
dry seasons, the creek never goes completely dry. The area is fertile, with
grasses, brush, and oak, pecan, and other trees. This region was woodland in
the late Pleistocene (16,000-14,000 BP), changing to savannah in the early
Holocene (10,000-6,000 BP) (Shafer, 1977:Figs. 1,2). Excellent chert is
abundantly available in the creek bed and on the slope below the terrace.

EXCAVATIONS
Surface collections of artifacts from 41FY53 and nearby sites (41FY54/
55/104) began about ten years ago. In February 1976, a test pit at 41FY53
yielded a large Clovis point. It was found in light gray sand at about 80 cm
depth, approximately 15 cm over the clay. Two large flakes (of different

136

Texas Archeological Society

chert), a few small black nodules (probably manganese ore), and a few small
gravel pebbles were in the same light sand above the clay.
From the surface to about 50 cm, the earth was darker and charcoal
stained. This deposit contained a number of fire broken rocks, a few chert
flakes, and a few natural gravel. The burnt rock formed an apparent layer at
approximately 45 cm. Other test pits showed a similar depth and stratigraphy,
with a number of Archaic and Neo-American projectile points in the upper
layers.
In July 1976, a test pit gave the first indication of the fluctuations in the
clay base. Its depth was 175 cm and there were considerable quantities of the
same black mineral in the lower sand. Connected excavations were begun in
this deeper area, about 8 m away from the Clovis point discovery.
Areas of I to 6 sq m were excavated at a time. Sediment was troweled
through arbitrary depth intervals of from 5 to 20 cm (as seemed appropriate to
the stratum being worked) and sifted through I/4 in mesh. Thus far, 67 sq m of
a projected 8 x 10 m rectangle have been excavated. An adjoining 9 × 1 m
test strip also was excavated. Its purpose was to extend the ridge profile
yielded by the west side of the basic rectangle.

~
~OL/~ADo
~"

FAYETTE

FY 53

CTY:

Fig. 1 Map of Texas showing location of Fayette County and site 41FY53.

Wilson -- Little Pin Oak Creek

137

Projectile points, cores, blades, scrapers, preforms, lithic debris, and fire
broken rocks were found at all levels. A number of larger and smaller rock
hearths were found, usually at median (probably Archaic) depth. A few
pieces of bone and animal and human teeth were discovered. Charcoal was
similarly rare, but a number of small pieces (up to a few cm in length) were
found.
The lowest sand typically contains small numbers of relatively large flakes
and other lithic artifacts, a few burnt rock fragments, and a few small natural
gravel. The upper part of the clay base (to a depth of about 15 cm) contains
similar materials but in greater isolation.
Figure 2 shows a north south profile along the west boundary of the
rectangle and the test strip. Reasons for clay base fluctuations are as yet
unclarified. The deeper areas (as at X-Z) seem to be pits rather than a channel. The ridge at R/S runs along the south wall of the rectangle for 8.5 m. The
shallowness of the sand to the north is typical for the vicinity of the rectangle,
as the clay rises towards the watershed. However, the apparent small channel
at P is not typical and still unexplained.
The shallowness of the test strip is also unusual, since test pits on both
sides of it have shown the more typical 90 to 130 cm depth. This shallowness
is probably due to the fact that the test strip runs towards a ridge of the slope.
The clay base at this point is part of a secondary watershed that is perpendicular to the creek.

ARTIFACTS
The excavation yielded a considerable quantity of important artifacts and
information. Besides flakes, cores, preforms, scrapers, blades, gouges, and
other tools, the rectangle yielded 30 projectile points of varied types.

o

Little

Pin

Oak

Creek

Site

Fayette County, Texas

Fig. 2 North-South profile of site 41FY53.

i

2m3

4

5

vert, exag,: 2:1

(41 FY53)

138

Texas Archeological Society

The chronological stratigraphy apparently is basically well preserved. Paleoindian artifacts occur on the clay surface and in the light sand above it,
followed by Archaic (e.g., Pedernales points), Neo-American (e.g., Scallorn
and Perdiz points), and Historic (e.g. metal knives, shell casings, a spur)
materials.
Careful analysis of all the materials is necessary to verify the stratigraphy.
Moreover, further considerable quantities of valuable materials from other
areas of the site are available from previous surface collections and test pits.
These materials can be used cautiously to augment materials from the current
excavation.
The Clovis point is made of opaque tan chert. Its length is 11.0 cm,
unbroked total length would have been about 13 cm; maximum width 4.2
cm; basal width 3.3 cm; maximum thickness 1.0 cm. There is one fairly large
flute on one face of the base and two smaller ones on the other face. Evidently, after putting in the flutes, the knapper was finishing the distal end
when a misstroke broke the artifact.
There is a small protrusion on the lateral edge at the breakage line which
was probably being trimmed at the time of the fracture. Base edges were not
smoothed, indicating that smoothing would have been added last. The spear
point is in perfect condition; a razor like edge along the upper part of the
fracture line is undisturbed. Evidently, the point was not transported by natural or human forces.
A large Plainview point was located on the clay base, about 10 m from the
Clovis one. This point is made of slightly translucent gray brown chert. Its
length is 5.6 cm, estimated total length 7.5 cm; maximum width 3.0 cm; base

CM
1

1
I

2
.... [

3
4
, I ............ t

5
I

Fig. 3 Clovis (below) and Plainview points (front and back; slightly reduced),

Wilson - Little Pin Oak Creek

139

width 2.6 cm; maximum thickness .75 cm. The basal edges were smoothed.
The edge flaking of the blade above the base was beveled, on the right side of
each face, leaving a slightly serrated edge.
Considerations of lateral outline and thickness seem to indicate that the
beveling is original and not the result of resharpening. However, microscopic
examination of the fractured distal end indicated some minor reworking
(Eileen Johnson, personal communication). The point was evidently broken
during use as a projectile. The concussion broke the top and shaft pressure
spalled bits of one side of the base, along the lateral and base edges.

SUMMARY
The Little Pin Oak Creek site is clearly a multicomponent campsite. There
is evidence of lithic manufacture from all levels (Paleoindian to NeoAmerican) and apparently well preserved, chronological stratigraphy. Besides the unfinished Clovis, at least one possible channel flake (with associated flakes nearby) was found in the Paleoindian sand layer. Careful
analysis will probably reveal others.
At a different part of the site (about 50 m away), a large base fragment was
found. It had a flute in one face which turned into the stone, breaking the
artifact. There is, thus, good reason to believe that thorough study of the
materials collected will show that Paleoindian fluted point knapping was being
conducted at the site.

CM

Fig. 4 Clovis (below) and Plainview points (front and back; slightly reduced). Dots
indicate extent of lateral grinding; arrows indicate spall.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Tunneli’s study (1977:143) of such knapping listed only two sites with this
kind of evidence in the state. The possible channel flake and possible fluted
base differ from the Folsom materials which form the basis of Tunnell’s (1977)
work. They may represent Clovis fluting techniques (Curtis Tunnell, personal
communication).
In the upper layers, such things as cores, arrow point preforms, and unfinished Scallorn points testify to later flint working activities.
The Fayette County location of the site is noteworthy, placing the Paleoindian campsite into the Upper Coastal Plain of Eastcentral Texas. Shafer
(1977:194) stressed the scarcity of Paleoindian "big game hunter" sites east
and south of the Balcones Escarpment, i.e., off the High Plains. Site 41FY53
is evidently a site of this type. Also, surface finds of Clovis and Plainview
points in Fayette County were reported at the Meier site (Meier and Hester,
1972, 1976) about 30 mi east of 41FY53.
The current excavation at the Little Pin Oak Creek site is continuing; it is
hoped that a complete report will be ready in 1980. Furthermore, other areas
of the site offer promising prospects for future excavations.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
! am grateful to a number of people for their help: to Eileen Johnson for consultations about
some of the excavated materials and for editorial advice; to Joel Shiner for a number of site
visitations, consultations, and other help, especially excavation supervision of most of the test
strip; to C. Vance Haynes and Robert Laury for a site visitation (arranged by Shiner) and consultations; to Thomas Hester and Curtis Tunnell for consultations; to Conrad Johnson for site
visitations, auger samplings, and aerial photography; to J.B. Sollberger, Margie Lohse, and
Bernard Naman for helping dig the test strip; and finally to Lohse, David Dibble, Frank Hole,
Vance Holliday, Robert Mallouf, Alan Skinner, and William Mayer-Oakes for brief but valuable
consultations.

REFERENCES CITED
Meier, Carl J. and Thomas R. Hester
1972
Notes on the Meier Site, Fayette County, Texas. Bulletin of the Lower
Plains Archeological Society, 2:69-71.

1976

Paleo-lndian Artifacts from the Meier Site, Southeast Texas. La Tierra,
3(1):16-19.

Shafer, Harry J.
Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
1977
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal, 17:187-197.
Tunnell, Curtis
1977
Fluted Projectile Point Production as Revealed by Lithic Specimens from
the Adair-Steadman Site in Northwest Texas. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal, 17:140-168.

High Resolution Photography
for Archeology
dune Secrist
ABSTRACT
High quality photographic work is a necessity for archeological field work and
publication. Often, the cost of professional photographic assistance is prohibitive
and the archeologist must obtain these skills. During the 1978 field season at
Lubbock Lake (41LU1) (Lubbock, Texas), photographic experimentation took
place to determine films and developers which provided the most accurate black
and white 35 mm documentation under a variety of conditions.
It was found that high resolution films with extremely fine grain, high resolution, but also high contrast (Kodak High Contrast Copy, SO 115, and H&W VTE
Pan), could be developed with special low contrast developers to produce high
quality, normal contrast 35 mm negatives. Special techniques are necessary to
obtain consistant results with high resolution materials. These procedures can be
followed by a person with basic darkroom experience.

INTRODUCTION
In recent years, 35 mm photography has gradually replaced the larger
format cameras both in the field and laboratory. Unfortunately, the small size
of the 35 mm negative often produces prints which are inferior both in resolution and grain to the ones produced from a larger negative.
A photographer is faced with many variables when attempting to produce
accurate images: camera equipment, metering, water chemistry, temperature control, weather conditions, and light quality. Other specific problems
(large, detailed, stratigraphic photographs with many small details and subtle
soil tone differences; to extreme close ups of wear polish on bone) were
encountered at the Lubbock Lake site during the 1978 field season. Due to
the many variables, a great deal of original photographic experimentation
was necessary.
Because of the need for superior yet inexpensive photography, a research
program was implemented to determine if good tonal qualities and extremely
fine grain could be obtained under various photographic situations.
Many archeological projects depend on films such as Panatomic-X and
fine grain developers such as Microdol-X for most photographic applications.
Results of using Microdol-X with Panatomic film were found to be either very
flat tone quality (lack of proper tone separation, muddy grays) in shade; or
very contrasty (lack of proper mid tones, mainly blacks and whites) in open
light. If the film was over exposed and under developed, the grain in the
negative was increased significantly; the print required considerable manipulation to yield a good tonal range.
After experimentation with other commonly used developers (Kodak HC
110, D-76, and Edwal F-G7), better tonal qualities were found. However,
the grain (size of the silver particles on the developed film which affects the

142

Texas Archeological Society

amount of detail in the photograph) was increased. Negatives could not compare to larger formats.
The photographic testing was expanded to include other films and developers. Excellent results were obtained from three films: H&W VTE Pan,
Kodak High Contrast Copy, and Kodak SO 115. These products are all high
resolution, thin emulsion films normally used for high contrast, fine line copy
work, or photomicography. With special low contrast developers (H&W
Control, ethol T.E.C°, Perfection Micrograin), negatives could be enlarged
50-60 times before the grain appeared~ The grain appears in Panatomic-X
when the negative is enlarged 15-20 times (Blaker, 1976:276).

HIGH RESOLUTION PHOTOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES
Both VTH Pan film and SO 115 have a high enough film speed rating to
hand hold the camera in some field situations. Best results occur, however,
when a sturdy tripod is used and the mirror is locked. Vibration is then kept to
a minimum.
For most field shots, a fairly slow 50 mm lens possesses fewer aberrations
in focus than a fast (f 1.2-1.8) lens. Figure 1 was photographed with a
50 mm f 2 Nikkor lens. This particular lens is extremely sharp at f 5.6. The
optimum aperture for a particular lens can be determined by obtaining the
manufacturer’s technical data or by experimenting and comparing results.
For studio artifact photography, a good flat field macro-lens, such as the
55 mm f 3.5 Micro Nikkor, should be used (Fig. 2). This lens is an excellent
black and white enlarging lens, particularly for extreme enlargements.
Another economical alternative to purchasing a macro-lens is the use of
screw-on diopters or close up lenses. These items, unfortunately, produce
distortions such as curved fields around the outside edges. The object to be
photographed must be placed in the center of the frame~
Good lenses need not be purchased new. Many camera exchanges have
guaranteed used equipment for half or less the new price.

HIGH RESOLUTION DEVELOPERS
Agitation directions must be followed very carefully while using high resolution developers, Otherwise, streaks can appear, especially in large, single
toned areas such as the sky. Use of 10 ml of acetic acid mixed with 8 oz of
water (per roll of film) for a stop bath after development prevents streaking
and produces even smaller grain.
If the developer produces negatives which are too contrasty, a pre-soak of
8 oz water with a drop or two of a wetting agent (such as Photo Flo) should be
poured over the film for one minute while in the developing tank. Agitation
every two seconds for the first 20-30 seconds will lower contrast and aid in
preventing streaks.
Negatives can be cleared with a rapid fixer within a two minute time span.
Longer than two minutes could affect the negative quality. If a hypo-clearing
solution is used for 30 seconds, wash time can be cut to two minutes. After

Secrist - High Resolution Photography

143

washing, negatives should be soaked in distilled water for a few minutes to
remove any impurities from the wash. Drying time is short due to the thin
emulsion (15-20 minutes).
These thin negatives can be more easily scratched than other film. They
should be handled only with cotton gloves. If the camera pressure plate is
scratching the film, a jeweler’s buffer with jeweler rouge will remove any
rough spot.

Fig. I Field shot (Lubbock Lake stratigraphy, strata 1-3) with gray card and tone scale.
H& W VTH Pan film developed in ethol TEC for 10 minutes at 68°F. Photographed
with a Nikkomat camera with Nikkor-H f2 lens, 1/60 sec, f5.6-8.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Developers
H&W 4.5. This developer comes in concentrated liquid form. A box of
small 10 ml vials are handy to measure and store enough developer for a
single roll of film. Used with VTH Pan film, H&W 4.5 is excellent for bright,
sunny conditions or for copy work under tungsten lights. In shade, the mid
(gray) tones are a bit muddy and indistinguishable. Unless the film is over
exposed half a stop, it is difficult to get a good white tone.
When Kodak SO 115 is developed in H&W 4.5, results are excellent,
especially for artifact studio photography. The appearance of a Kodak High
Contrast Copy negative is similar in contrast to one developed in Perfection
Micrograin.
ETHOL T.E.C. This developer is comprised of two parts which are
mixed together in equal amounts, then dilluted 1:30 for most high resolution
applications. It produced excellent results with both VTH Pan and SO 115
under varied lighting conditions.
PERFECTION MICROGRAIN. Because of the tendency of this developer to be contrasty, it should not be used in bright or mottled sunlight. It is
excellent in overcast situations or in shaded areas. Perfection Micrograin developer comes in convenient tablets. If only a few rolls are being developed at
a time, this developer is an economical choice. Long development times
(Table 1) proved to be a definite drawback unless a motorized agitator is
used.

3

0

CM
Fig. 2 Photograph of a Plainview point
(Lubbock Lake. TTU-A23935). Film used
was Kodak SO 115, developed for 91/2
minutes at 68°F in H& W developer.

Secrist - High Resolution Photography

145

Table 1
High Resolution Films and Developers: Suggested Development Times in
Minutes, at 68° F.
Perfection
Micrograin

H&W Control

ethol TEC
dilluted 1:30

(ASA 50)

20

91/2

Kodak High Contrast
Copy (ASA 12)

20

8

14

--

61/2

I0

Kodak SO 115
9

H&W VTH Pan

(ASA 32)

DEVELOPING FOR HIGH CONTRAST SLIDES, MAPS,
OR GRAPHICS
Both SO 115 and High Contrast Copy films can be developed in Kodak
D-19 for various technical purposes. SO 115 is capable of a much greater
degree of contrast than High Contrast Copy film. It is excellent for preparing
slide presentations where a dense black background is needed.

FILM SPEED AND METERING
ASA ratings vary with different situations, meters, and cameras. Data in
Table I are based on film tests which were metered with a Luna Pro meter off
a gray card. A gray card is a large neutral area of 18% reflection which is the
average reflection of a given light source. It is available in most photographic
stores. Bracketing exposures in half stop increments, two stops over and
under the correct exposure, is a good procedure to determine what is best for
the particular equipment.

PRINTING HIGH RESOLUTION NEGATIVES
Generally, high resolution negatives require shorter exposure times than
ordinary 35 mm negatives. If exposure time is too short, rather than stopping
down the enlarging lens (which may effect the overall sharpness of the print),
a dimmer switch between the timer and enlarger can be connected. The
sharpest lens aperture (usually f 5.6-8) can be used with reduced light.
Most SO 115 and VTE Pan negatives print on a number 3 or 4 paper or a
medium to contrasty paper. High Contrast Copy negatives print best on a low
contrast number 1 or 2 paper. For further information on these films and
developers, the following companies can be contacted:

146

Texas Archeological Society

Technical Department
Perfection Photographic Products Inc.
8730 Wilshire Boulevard
Beverly Hills, California 90112
The H&W Company
Box 332
St. Johnsbury, Vermont 05819
Scientific and Technical Photography
Professional and Finishing Markets Division
Eastman Kodak Company
Rochester, New York 14650
ethol Chemicals Incorporated
1808 North Damen Avenue
Chicago, lllinois 60647

ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
Use of high resolution materials is an economic alternative to large format
photography. Processing time, especially washing and drying, is much shorter than with conventional films (an exception is Perfection Micrograin developer). Costs for chemicals and films are only slightly higher or the same as
commonly used 35 mm black and white materials.

CONCLUSION
The savings in time, the superior quality obtained from high resolution
photography, and its success under various conditions make it a valuable tool
for archeological research. Directions (technical data; Anonymous, 1978,
1979) must be followed exactly to obtain the best results. However, some
testing must be done to account for variations in equipment, procedure, and
environment.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
Special thanks to the Lubbock Lake Project and its Director, Dr. Eileen Johnson for support
and assistance; and to Jay Goldklang, assistant photographer for the 1978 Lubbock Lake field
season. This paper and photographic experimentation is part of the on-going research of the
Lubbock Lake Project funded through the National Science Foundation, Center for Field Research, Texas Historical Commission, City and County of Lubbock, and The Museum of Texas
Tech University.

REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1978
H&W Control Technical Data Sheet. H&W Company, St. Johnsbury,
Vermont.
1979

Kodak Technical Pamplet NDP-255. Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, New York.

Blaker, Alfred A.
1976
Field Photography. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

BOOK REVIEWS
Texas Archeology: Essays Honoring R. King Harris. Edited by Kurt D.
House. Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Reports of Investiga.
tions, No. 3, Southern Methodist University. 1978. xx + 178 pp.
$12.50.
The overall content and quality of this volume of ten essays is certainly a credit to
the man whom it honors. For the most part, the tenor of the essays reflects the
dynamics of the man, his time in grade in Texas archeology, his many areas of interest,
and his many contributions to the field. It is significant to note that most of the essays
tend to an historic overview of various methodological and areal topics in Texas archeology.
Krieger and Wendorf delineate the development and continuation of the very
important relationship between the amateur and professional archeologists. This relationship has been and still is characteristic of Texas archeology.
Wetherington gives a fine historical presentation of the development of method
and theory in Texas archeology. In some areas, he is somewhat misleading. Primarily,
this problem arose because, rather than experiencing the development, he has only
read about it or used the literature as a source for developing his sequence.
For example, most, if not all of us, who were "doing typology" never really saw
typology or foci as ends. I think we fully realized that these were tools to be used.
However, no one had yet discovered how they could best facilitate the exposition of
the human cultural experience as expressed in the archeological record.
In addition, I know of no sites that were excavated in which there was not some
research design based on a pre-excavation hypothesis. What has actually come about
is a change in archeological goals. This change has brought about a change in the type
of preexcavation hypothesis and therefore research design. Designs and hypotheses
exemplified in contemporary archeological literature are possible only because of the
earlier hypotheses (i.e., this is: 1) a site; and 2) in an area and time for which there is no
information) and designs (excavate in a fashion which we believe will yield the most
information). Unfortunately, hypothesis and design were not often expressed, primarily because we thought we all knew why we were doing what we were doing. To his
credit, Wetherington ends his essay with a very nice statement on the advantages and
liabilities of the new perspective.
Essays by Webb and Story may be the most informative contributions, particularly
to Texas archeologists and archeologists interested in Caddo archeology and the
Trans-Mississippi South. Webb outlines specifically the significant and close cooperation between amateur and professional that has typified and sustained Texas archeology for nearly sixty years. Webb, every bit as professional an amateur as his friend
and colleague, R. K. Harris, details this relationship of amateur-professional in a very
informative, historical perspective. Webb and Harris were there.
Story gives a succinct discussion of anthropological studies concerning the Caddo.
Her essay is a timely historical mini-review of Caddo in terms of linguistics, ethnography, physical anthropology, and archeology. She outlines the solid march of ever
increasing sophistication in archeological studies that has brought the discipline to the
level of research evident today. A point well made is that, given the continued destruction of sites, we must get on with "what we have come to call Caddoan archaeology".
The next essay has the only organizational flaw in the collection. If it had been
grouped with the other essays on historic archeology, the flow of ideas would have
proceeded a little more smoothly. Nevertheless, in the essay by Humphreys and
Singleton, there is a well written statement concerning historic archeology in Texas,
another field in which R. K. Harris made substantial and even historic contributions.
They outline the somewhat fruitless argument of historicists versus anthropologists.
The authors continue with a very nice discussion of important historical periods in

148

Texas Archeological Society

Texas as well as (as far as I know) a first time outline of the history of historic archeology
in the area.
Although I agree there are "poignant deficiencies in the realization of the potential
of fauna in Texas studies", I find House’s essay on faunal analysis deficient in his listing
of site reports containing faunal listings and analyses. Although I realize that one cannot have access to all sources, to neglect the many creditable reports that have emanated from the Texas Historical Commission and the Texas Archeological Survey
(formerly Texas Archeological Salvage Project) and elsewhere at the University of
Texas is remiss, and detracts from the overall quality of this essay.
The listings alluded to would have almost doubled the author’s list and greatly
enhanced the value of his essay. Nevertheless, House’s point is well taken and points
the way for continued emphasis on all types of cultural data present in archeological
sites.
Gilmore’s essay on Spanish Colonial settlements and archeology continues to emphasize the honoree’s interest in historic archeology, particularly that of the French and
Spanish aboriginal contact period. Gregory’s ethno-archeological essay on the historic
Tunica burial emphasizes the fact that ethnography and the direct historical approach
to prehistory is still a valid research tool for archeologists.
The series of essays is completed with reminiscences by W. W. Crook, Jr., R. K.
Harris’ partner in many an escapade. While anecdotal, the essay succeeds well in
demonstrating the true Renaissance man that R. K. "King" Harris is and has been to
the historical sweep of Texas archeology.
James E. Corbin
Department of Sociology
Stephen F. Austin State University
Nacogdoches, Texas 75962

Historical Archaeology: A Guide to Substantive and Theoretical Contributions. Edited by Robert L. Schuyler. Baywood Publishing Co., Inc.,
Farmingdale, New York. 1978. xiv + 302 pp. $15.00.
Despite the existence of societies, journals, technical works, and formal university
courses, historical archeology remains an ill-defined discipline whose practitioners frequently disagree on method, purpose, and interpretation. Designed as a basic text,
Schuyler’s Historical Archeology is a compilation of articles dealing with research and
theory in historical archeology.
The articles are divided into five sections, each prefaced with an introduction by
Schuyler containing a brief analysis of the articles within that section. The sections deal
with: 1) historical archeology as a discipline; 2) the subfields of historical archeology; 3)
examples of research; 4) the theoretical bases of historical archeology; and 5) future
research trends in historical archeology.
Schuyler includes articles by many of the researchers whose work and ideas contributed to the development of historical archeology. An example is the marvelous
report by C. J. Harrington, who excavated the site of Fort Necessity, one of
Washington’s Revolutionary War forts. Harrington describes the misinterpretations of
documentary and physical evidence which resulted in a completely erroneous reconstruction of the fort in 1932. In contrast is the plan produced by a complete excavation
and evaluation of the historical record which Harrington accomplished in 1952-1953.
The examples of dating methodology included in the work are particularly interesting: Harrington’s initial presentation of the dating potential of clay pipestems; Lewis R.
Binford’s re-evaluation and refinement of the method; Stanley South’s mathematical

Book Reviews

149

derivation of site occupation dates determined by sherd quantity and dates of production; and James F. Deetz’s evaluation of the evolution of tombstone motifs in New
England.
Schuyler also exposes the reader to point/counterpoint; the prickly world of disagreement in print. One especially enjoyable article is fan C. Walker’s return fire at
Lewis Binford for what Walker obviously considers a multitude of affronts: "Binford,
Science, and History: The Probabilistic Variability of Explicated Epistemology and
Nomothetic Paradigms in Historical Archaeology".
Most of all, I was fascinated by the material dealing with the theoretical controversie,s: particularly the question of whether or not historical archeology should be considered a subarea of archeology or a distinct and separate discipline, sharing only some of
the technical methods of excavation with archeology. To put it another way, is historical archeology history or is it archeology? Differing viewpoints are presented in
Harrington’s "Archaeology as an Auxiliary Science to American History" and
Schuyler’s own "Historical and Historic Sites Archaeology as Anthropology: Basic
Definitions and Relationships".
This conflict revolves to some extent around the nature of the evidence dealt with in
archeology as opposed to history. The archeologist arrives at his conclusions primarily
based on excavation and the analysis of physical evidence. The historian strives to
develop a narrative and analysis of events derived primarily from written documents.
The historical archeologist, however, must derive his conclusions by utilizing both
avenues of analysis.
In general, the articles Schuyler selected for Historical Archaeology are representative of the research and concepts from which historical archeology has developed.
Schuyler’s editorial comments on these articles are of great interest in their own right.
The work is both useful as a reference and will provide most enjoyable reading for
anyone interested in historical archeology.

James E. Ivey
Center for Archaeological Research
University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas 78285

A Field Guide to Conservation Archaeology in North America. By
Georgess McHargue and Michael Roberts. J. B. Lippincott Co., New
York. 1977. 320 pp. $4.95 (paper), $8.95 (cloth).
Conservation archeology, according to this book, is non-destructive archeology:
archeology that asks whether there is not a better way to learn about a site than to
destroy it by digging it up. This is a very welcome book. It is directed mostly at methods
of surface survey on a fairly sophisticated, non-professional level. The authors are a
wife and husband team, McHargue being a writer; Roberts is an engineer-archeologist
who came into archeology as an amateur and now runs the archeological contract
program at Harvard. They have written a clear, practical, commonsense how to do it
book for the non-professional.
After first dispelling the usual myths about pith-helmeted archeologists hunting for
golden art objects, they define the subject area of the book. They point out that in
conservation archeology, professionals and amateurs work as a team in both aspects of
the work: the technical aspect that involves field work and analysis; and the public
aspect that includes protection of sites, education, and influencing public policy.
Most of the book is concerned with technical matters. How do you get background
information before going into the field? How is systematic survey done? How do you

150

Texas Archeological Society

recognize artifacts and sites? How are adequate records kept? What does one do with
the records and objects? What is historic archeology? What kinds of auxiliary studies
can be done?
This last question is treated in a chapter entitled "Pots, pH, Pollen, and the Bristlecone Pine." In this chapter, all kinds of laboratory work such as flint-knapping, other
imitative experiments, petrographic analysis, soils analysis, dendrochronology, and
radiocarbon dating (the authors share a common misconception that radiocarbon
comes from ordinary carbon, when actually it comes from nitrogen; a minor point) are
discussed.
There is an interesting chapter on interviewing old folks about family traditions that
might shed light on local archeological evidences. I think it would have been well if the
reader had been advised to see if a nearby college or historical society might already be
carrying on an oral history program.
The next to last chapter discusses digging test pits; and how one might get to
participate in a regular dig. The final chapter, entitled "Who Owns Archaeology?,"
presents the public relations side of things, especially through the setting up of local
museums. This chapter would have been strengthened by more discussion of other
public activities in archeology, such as letters to the editor, talks to civic groups, archeology and the Boy and Girl Scouts, and the role of local and state archeological
societies.
In the midst of this material is a chapter called "The Uncyclopedia [sic] of North
American Prehistory," which the authors characterize as "a lightning tour of the
continent’s archaeology . . . whose main purpose is to help you find the information
you need by making you familiar with the kinds of subject headings you might look for
in a library card catalog." Not an easy task in one chapter, but they accomplish it. The
continent is divided into eight major areas, and the prehistory of each is rapidly reviewed (the only nit I have to pick here is that the Woodland tradition is called
Woodlands throughout). At the end of each section, the major current research problems are summarized: a refreshing innovation in such a review.
The reader of the "uncyclopedia" is referred to an appendix that is "A Guide to
Typical Prehistoric Artifacts of North America." Unfortunately, the illustrations in this
appendix are heavily oriented toward collectors’ "goodies" rather than typical artifacts;
the appendix is out of place in a book on conservation archeology. Other appendices,
however, are more appropriate: citation of U.S. and Canadian archeological laws
(discussions of them, and of state laws, would have helped), a useful bibliography
(although it leaves out the most recent edition of Hester, Heizer, and Graham’s Guide
to Held Methods), and a handy list of addresses for archeological information and
equipment.
I am surprised that more is not said about local and state societies in this excellent
book. Their roles in conservation archeology have been, and should continue to be,
important. But in general, the book is fine, highly recommended, and indeed as overdue as is the whole conservation approach in archeology. Local archeological societies
ought to buy three copies of this book: one for the society library, one for the public
library, and one for the library of the nearest high school.
E. Mott Davis
Department of Anthropology
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78712

OBITUARY
ROBERT F. HEIZER
(1915-1979)
Robert Fleming Heizer, Professor Emeritus in the Department of Anthropology,
University of California, Berkeley, died on July 18, 1979, following a lengthy illness.
He was born in Denver, Colorado, and grew up in Lovelock, Nevada. He initially
attended Sacramento Junior College. Later, he transferred to the University of California where he received his A.B. degree in 1936 and his Ph.D. degree, under Alfred L.
Kroeber, in 1941. In 1965, he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science degree by
the University of Nevada.
Professor Heizer was the first archeologist on the Berkeley faculty at the time of his
appointment in 1947. He became internationa!ly known for his active research in
many facets of archeology in various parts of the world. Much of his early field work
was concentrated in California (the cultural sequence he worked out for northern
California as an undergraduate student in the mid-1930’s is still used today) and the
Great Basin. He later worked in Mesoamerica, South America, and Egypt. In the
summer of 1976, he worked with the author in excavations at Baker Cave in Val Verde
County, Texas.
Professor Heizer was never a member of the Texas Archeological Society. However, his work as an archeologist directly influenced many Society members. A number undoubtedly got their first field training by using early editions of his book, A
Manual of Field Methods in Archaeology, originally published in 1949.
In addition, the first published scientific account of the famous Olmec site of La
Venta appeared in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (1957, 28:98-110).
Professor Heizer’s other contributions to the Bulletin were in 1974 (45:191-196),
"Some Thoughts on Hoaxes and Fakes"; and in 1976 (47:1-24), "La Venta: A Cradle
of Mesoamerican Civilization."
Professor Heizer’s other activities in Texas included participation in the symposium
"Prehistoric Man in the New World," held at Rice University in 1962; a series of guest
lectures at the University of Texas at San Antonio in 1975; guest speaker at the
Society’s banquet at the 1975 annual meeting held in San Antonio; and field work at
Baker Cave in 1976. He was a key figure in the debate over the nature of the Lewisville
locality excavated by the Dallas Archeological Society (see R. F. Heizer and R.
Brooks, "Lewisville--Ancient Campsite or Wood Rat Houses?", Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology, 1965, 21:155-165).
Between 1937 and 1979, Professor Heizer authored more than 475 publications,
including 401 papers, edited volumes and monographs; 52 book reviews; and 23
books. This total does not include papers, monographs, and books that he had in press
at the time of his death or the more than 20 papers and books in draft form or in
preparation at this time. It is an incredible record of anthropological achievement.
Professor Heizer felt very strongly that both professional and avocational archeologists must report the’results of their field work. "To allow field notes and artifacts to sit
unattended for years is a dereliction of archaeological responsibility. Persons wishing to
merit the title of archaeologist must promptly communicate to their colleagues,

152

Texas Archeological Society

through publication, what they have found and how they view the data in terms of
current archaeological knowledge" (from T. R. Hester, R. F. Heizer, and J. A. Graham, Held Methods in Archaeology, 6th edition, 1975:304). This is a message that
members of the Society, and all archeologists, should keep in mind.
Thomas R. Hester
Center for Archaeological Research
University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas 78285

Fig. 1 Robert F. Heizer at the field camp of the Baker Cave excavations,
July 1976. Photograph by George K. Greaves III.

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
A History of the Texas
Archeological Society and the
Establishment of a State
Archeologist
James H. Word
INTRODUCTION
This is an account of the part played by the Texas Archeological Society in
establishing the position of State Archeologist. In most instances, exact dates
cannot be cited due to loss of pertinent correspondence. Furthermore, the
more forceful advocate of this quest habitually did not date his letters. Consequently, this account is a narrative in a sequence of events and people involved.

EARLY EFFORTS
An act entitled "Federal Aid Highway and Highway Revenue Acts of
1956" and a Directive of the United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads, provided for archeological and paleontological salvage
in connection with highway construction. This Act and Directive provided for
90% federal participation and a matching 10% by the state. A state or salvage
archeologist was required in order to implement a salvage program. Both
professionals and amateurs in Texas realized the importance and potential of
such a program.
In November 1956, a resolution was passed at the annual meeting of the
Texas Archeological Society (Waco) urging the establishment of a State Historical Commission and position of Salvage Archeologist. R. K. Harris, then
President of the Texas Archeological Society, sent a letter on February 12,
1957 to all members of the Society. The letter brought to the members’ attention the importance of site preservation. Sites were being rapidly lost to urban
development, highway construction, and dam and reservoir construction.
Harris urged TAS members to educate the public and to urge their legislators
to support such an act.
On March 5, 1957, Senate Bill No. 322 entitled "An Act to Create the
Texas Archaeological Commission" was introduced by Senator Doyle Willis
of Fort Worth. A six member commission was proposed with staggered terms
of six years. Other state agencies were obligated to cooperate with the Commission. The bill failed to pass.
Committees appointed by succeeding presidents did not function with
any effectiveness; thus, during the next four years, there was a hiatus. The

154

Texas Archeological Society

TAS seemed to be wallowing in disorganized chaos until Wilson Crook, Jr.,
1960-1961 president, reactivated the Salvage Committee. This new group
consisted of Crook, Richard E. Johnson, and Hubert Mewhinney.
At the 1960 annual meeting, a resolution was passed requesting then
Governor Price Daniel to appoint an Advisory Committee to deal with
salvage archeology. One difficulty in making a presentation to Governor
Daniel was The University of Texas administration policy forbidding faculty
members to become involved in political matters. While professional expert
advise was available, professional thrust was not allowed.
Mewhinney offered to make an effort to see the governor and present the
resolution. The Advisory Committee was to function on a voluntary basis
without funds. However, Mewhinney was cautioned not to contact the legislature until other members of the Committee had had an opportunity to respond with their thoughts.
In 1961, Texas was suffering from financial stress. It was generally felt that
any proposal including financial support would not be accepted by either the
legislature or Governor Daniel. Mewhinney urged haste in getting something
done. However, the Advisory Committee concept was the only suggestion
the TAS Salvage Committee could offer. In an effort to gain public support
and make archeological needs known, Mewhinney urged TAS to get a public
relations person. He hoped that newspaper, radio, and television stories
would be beneficial in the general education of the public. However, there
was no action taken.
Correspondence between Mewhinney and E. Mott Davis at this time was
one of dispair. Davis lamented that Mewhinney and Crook were the only
active members. Mewhinney complained that professionals did not take the
press into their confidence, thus favorable publicity was absent.
In August 1961, Mewhinney suggested that an Archeological Reconnaissance Foundation be established for one year and supported by private funds.
Davis urged Mewhinney to go after the money. He felt a two year period for
such a foundation would be a more firm basis for research than the one year
suggested by Mewhinney.
Others offering comments including W. W. Newcomb, Jr., Director of
the Texas Memorial Museum. He felt that more survey was not needed at the
present time, but excavation of critical sites the more urgent issue. Dee Ann
Story, Director of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, felt any
funds raised could be better spent analyzing archeological material in storage
at Little Campus at The University of Texas (Austin). Thus, there was a dichotomy between the professionals and the idea of a foundation died on the vine.

FINAL EFFORTS 1962 - 1965
In August 1962, James H. Word was forced to spend a long weekend in
Del Norte, Colorado as the result of automobile mechanical failure. Word had
bought a copy of A Guide for Salvage Archaeology (Wendorf, 1962) which
he read and reread while repairs were being made. Enthusiasm was aroused.

Word -- TAS and the State Archeologist

155

At the 1962 TAS annual meeting (Victoria), Word met Mewhinney. TAS
President Wayne Neyland appointed Word to the Texas Archeological
Salvage Committee for the purpose of establishing the position of State
Highway Archeologist. The entire committee consisted of Mewhinney and
Word.
In January 1963, Mewhinney and Word met with Texas Highway Engineer Dewitt Greer to urge the establishment of the position of Highway Archeologist. Greer was courteous but firm in stating that the constitutional
authority of the Texas Highway Department was to plan, build, and maintain
highways. Greer stated that these were the sole functions of the Highway
Department. Directly after the meeting with Greer, Mewhinney and Word
met with Governor John Connally and outlined the need for a State Archeologist. Connally showed an interest by asking pointed questions on archeological salvage matters.
Following the conference with Governor Connally, Mewhinney was encouraged with the receptions of the TAS Committee. He wrote Word, Newcomb, Edward B. Jelks, Davis, T. N. Campbell, and Jack T. Hughes (President of TAS) that he had drafted a bill establishing the Office of State
Archeologist.
Under Mewhinney’s proposal, the Director of the Texas Memorial Museum was to serve as State Archeologist without pay. The State Archeologist
would appoint members of the Commission consisting of one member each
from The University of Texas, Texas A & M, Baylor, Southern Methodist
University, Texas Christian University, Rice University, and Texas Technological College.
Davis replied to Mewhinney and suggested that the State Archeologist be
Curator of Anthropology since the Museum Director might not always be an
anthropologist. He further suggested that the governor appoint members
consisting of professionals and non-professionals from different areas of the
state. Mewhinney accepted these suggestions and the revised bill was submitted to the legislature March 18, 1963. Revisions were made and again submitted March 19, 1963. The Mewhinney bill was rejected.
Mewhinney became dejected and bemoaned again the lack of public relations and failure of the professionals to take the news media into their confidence. In April 1963, Word wrote Davis urging that something be done this
session of the legislature. The Salvage Committee would accept changes, but
it would not accept any drastic changes. As a second option, it should enter
into a public relations campaign involving professionals, TAS, and the interested public. The various groups were to get behind the effort and insist
upon an ideal legislative act in the 1965 session of the legislature.
Later in April, Mewhinney wrote Newcomb, Jelks, Davis, Campbell,
Hughes, and Word that Representative Hank C. Grover of Houston had
agreed to attach an amendment to the appropriation bill if it was acceptable to
Bill Heatly, Chairman of the Appropiations Committee. Heatly accepted the
amendment and it passed both houses. The amendment to the budget provided for finances for a State Archeologist under the Texas Memorial Museum. Governor Connally item vetoed the entire budget of the Museum.
Quite a stir was created at The University of Texas and the Memorial
Museum. For the first time, the Museum budget came under budget pro-

156

Texas Archeological Society

posals of The University of Texas, where it remains today. Newcomb wrote
the Committee and other involved parties relating to the veto of the Museum
budget: "It was a nice try but the backfire hurts. I think it would be wise, both
for the success of the venture and for the good of the Museum, to count the
Museum out of this effort in the future."
In the meantime, Word had been working at Baker Cave near Del Rio. He
contacted Ed Sayers who authored a syndicated column entitled "Off the
Beaten Trail" and invited him to visit the excavations. Sayers met with Word
in May 1963, and wrote an article about the dig and the importance of preserving history and prehistory. He offered a suggestion that articles be written
to newspapers across the state citing the needs for preservation of archeological resources and a State Archeologist.
Sayers provided a list of editors and newspapers that carried his articles.
Letters were written to the editors and the thrust of each letter cited needs for
preservation on a local level. It was hoped by this effort that public interest
would be aroused which in turn would influence the attitude of each legislator. The response was gratifying as most newspapers cooperated by printing
the letters with its appeal.
In June 1963, following Governor Connally’s veto, Word wrote Davis his
thoughts on the Committee’s failure as follows: "I. The Committee was too
loosely organized. Efforts for the best and maximum results lacked coordination. 2. Suggestions were received from various persons on the best way to
proceed, but the Committee did not get together to weld them into a feasible
and workable plan. 3. The Governor has requested a plan to be submitted to
him outlining the needs and stressing the importance of a State Archeologist.
4. The Committee did not confer with the Governor but acted independently."
In December 1964, Davis wrote an article stating the importance of Texas’
archeological past and the urgent need to preserve these resources. He cited
instances of salvage efforts of imperiled sites as a result of dam, reservoir, and
road construction. He made recommendations on how to preserve the heritage, one of which was to establish a State Archeological Commission.
January 1965, was a busy month for the TAS and its efforts to get a State
Archeologist. In Governor Connally’s speech to the joint session of the Legislature, a recommendation was made that the Office of State Archeologist be
established. The Salvage Committee had achieved one of its goals -- the
backing of the Governor. Again, the TAS membership was urged to pressure
their legislators for favorable votes for the measure.
Prior to Governor Connally’s speech, a joint meeting was held between
the Texas State Historical Survey Committee represented by John Ben Shepperd, Texas Old Mission Restoration Association represented by Robert S.
Weddel, and the Texas Archeological Society represented by Word. Previous to the joint meeting, Word had written a statement citing the need for a
State Archeologist.
Word met with Davis and Jelks to detail the responsibilities of this position
and a budget was recommended. These details were added to Word’s statement. TAS had the only formal statement on the Governor’s request for a
State Archeologist. This presentation was accepted by the joint committee.
Shepperd recommended that the State Archeologist be placed under the

Word - TAS and the State Archeologist

157

Building Commission since it was a constituted authority and funds had to be
appropriated by law.
The February 1965 issue of Texas Archeology quoted Governor
Connally’s address to the joint session of the Legislature as follows: "I further
urge that you expand our successful program of marking and preserving
historical homes, frontier forts, missions, and archaeological sites so vital to
the Texas heritage. It is a little known fact that Texas has some of the world’s
most significant and beautiful examples of pre-historic pictographs and habitations of primitive man, yet the state has no formalized method for cataloging
or pretecting these priceless treasures from vandalism and destruction. Since
the State Building Commission now has statutory authority to conduct such a
program, I recommend that the position of State Archeologist be authorized
on the Commission staff."
On February 19, 1965, Word (President of TAS) received the following
letter from Governor John Connally.
"As you know, the report you assisted John Ben Shepperd and the Texas
Historical Survey Committee in compiling has been the basis of some of my
most important recommendations to the Legislature.
I greatly appreciate your help on this matter, and believe we have sufficient information to develop a sound program."
All officers, Regional Directors, and members of the TAS were galvanized
into action. Letters to legislators and pertinent committee chairmen urging
support were written by members of the TAS. Regional societies were asked
to write resolutions to their legislators. Again, the response was good. The
Acts of the 59th Legislature (1965) passed a bill creating the position of State
Archeologist under the State Building Commission.
Discussions were held between Davis and Word on who would be the best
candidate for this new position. Davis felt that Curtis Tunnell, archeologist at
the Texas Memorial Museum, was best suited for the job. Tunnell applied for
the position in July and requested permission for time to complete his responsibilities at the Museum if accepted. Word as president of TAS wrote Admiral
H. R. Nieman, Jr., Executive Director of the State Building Commission,
recommending Tunnell and urged that time be allowed for the completion of
prior obligations.
In September 1965, Tunnell was appointed State Archeologist. In 1969,
the 61st Legislature transferred the Office of State Archeologist to the Texas
Historical Survey Committee. Later, this body was changed by legislative act
to The Texas Historical Commission where it remains today.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The establishment of a State Archeologist was the result of the efforts of many people. The
entire membership of the Texas Archeological Society contributed. However, there were individuals who in particular gave time and effort beyond the call of duty. These people have been
mentioned in this brief account. Two people in particular are recognized for their efforts. E. Mort
Davis was advisor, father confessor, and a constant and consistent force during the entire nine
years. Hubert Mewhinney’s dedication through discouraging and trying times finally brought to
fruition a goal set in 1956. He fought lack of interest and cooperation, he cajoled, overcame
dispair, and was a driving force in accomplishing what at times seemed a hopeless cause.

158

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Davis, E. Mott
1964
Feature of the Month. The Mustang, 6(8):1-6.
1965

Texas Archeology, 9(2):1-7.

Wendorf, Fred
A Guide for Salvage Archaeology. Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa
1962
Fe:

E. Mort Davis
ABSTRACT
The Texas Archeological Society (called the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society until 1952) was founded in Abilene in 1928-29. The strong and
colorful personality of Dr. Cyrus N. Ray kept the Society active through the De~
pression and World War IL Under his editorship, the Bulletin of the Texas Attheological Society (BTAS) became a well known regional archeological journal.
When he stepped down in 1947, professionals became more active in Society
affairs; but amateurs and professionals always were involved together~ As arm
cheology progressed in the state, the Society gave unity to the effort by providing a
publication outlet and an opportunity for personal communication at the annual
meetings. The climax of the first quarter century was the publication of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology (BTAS 25).

An unusual discovery in 1923 at Colorado City, in West Texas, started
the chain of events that led to the founding of the Texas Archeological Society. A man and a boy from Colorado City, companions in relic collecting,
often roamed the plains around the town together, sharing the pleasure of
finding Indian arrow points. In 1923 near town, they saw the fossilized bones
of a large animal eroding out of the bank of Lone Wolf Creek, buried under
many feet of stream deposits.
The man was Nelson J. Vaughan, the Postmaster in Colorado City, who
had read a good deal about paleontology and archeology and had corresponded with authorities on the subject. Realizing that the buried bones might
be of scientific importance, he notified the Colorado Museum of Natural History in Denver. In 1924, the Museum sent one of its field men, H.D. Boyes, to
investigate the discovery with Mr. Vaughan’s help. The following year,
Harold J. Cook, the Museum’s Honorary Curator of Paleontology, studied
the geology of the area in order to date the find.
The Colorado City discovery turned out to be noteworthy; more than a
half century later, it is still mentioned in books on American archeology.
Three things made it remarkable for its time. First, the bones were those of an
extinct form of bison, now known as Bison antiquus. Second, Mr. Cook’s
geologic work showed that the skeleton dated from the late Pleistocene
epoch, which today would mean it was at least 10,000 years old. Third, when
Boyes and Vaughan were investigating the discovery, they found three chert
projectile points closely associated with the bones. In other words, late Pleistocene hunters had killed a form of bison that is now extinct.
This evidence was contrary to the thinking of the times~ The prevalent
opinion of the 1920’s was that the earliest people in the Americas lived no
longer ago than a few thousand years before the Christian era. This period
was long after the close of the Pleistocene epoch and the extinction of Bison
antiquus. The Colorado City find was, therefore, potentially of great significance.

160

Texas Archeological Society

Harold Cook wrote articles announcing the discovery in a number of
national journals: Science, Scientific American, and Natural History. But because of the preconceptions of the time and the poor documentation of the
discovery of the points in the field, these articles did not make a very great
impression. It took later discoveries (especially the Folsom find in New Mexico) to make the case for the Pleistocene age of the early American hunters.
For Texas archeologists, however, the discovery by Mr. Vaughan and his
youthful companion has special significance. Sixty miles east of Colorado
City, in Abilene, lived Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, an osteopathic surgeon, naturalist,
and subscriber to Scientific American. A man of wide ranging interests, Dr.
Ray read Harold Cook’s article about the Colorado City find and realized that
the countryside around Abilene was probably full of undiscovered, unrecorded, unstudied, and unappreciated evidences of prehistoric peoples.
Such a realization was, for Dr. Ray, a call to action. As he wrote later, in
1934, in the Bulletin of the society he founded,
The search for evidences of ancient man in Texas was deliberately undertaken.., during
the summer of 1927,’following the reading of a magazine article . . . It was hoped to find
skeletal and cultural evidences of Pleistocene man in Texas, if any such existed~

Dr. Ray eventually brought together a group of people sharing his interest in
archeology; it was this group that became the Texas Archeological Society.
Dr. Ray is the principal hero of our story. A big, powerful bear of a man,
his incisive mind and great energy ranged far beyond osteopathy and archeology. All of nature was his field of operations. He studied a wide range of
subjects: plant breeding, mineralogy, gardening, ceramics. Being a man of
action, he experimented, wrote, and published articles on everything he did.
Once he had thought a matter out, his opinions were usually firm, sometimes
fixed, and often fiery. He was independent, eloquent, persistent, and unafraid.
Those who remember him recall his unusual ability to arouse simultaneous admiration and anger; admiration for his accomplishments, integrity,
intellect, and courage; anger at the forcefulness with which he pressed his
ideas and his personality on others. He had a great body of loyal friends and
admirers; while at the same time, in the words of one of his old friends, he had
"an absolute, superb gift for making people mad." Cyrus Ray was, in short, a
formidable person both physically and in personality.
Quite characteristically, once Dr. Ray had read Harold Cook’s account of
the Colorado City discovery, he set about to search the river banks of the
Abilene area for signs of ancient peoples. On his weekend forays, he was
usually joined by E.B. Sayles, who shared his new found interest. Within two
years, they had accumulated enough information on buried sites of artifacts
and fossils so that Dr. Ray could contribute an article of his own to Scientific
American, "New Evidences of Ancient Man in America" (May, 1929).
It could also be expected that Dr. Ray, having become interested in Texas
archeology, would start reading whatever was available on the subject. He
found that relatively little had been done to study the prehistoric past of the
state despite the efforts of persons such as Professor J.E. Pearce (University
of Texas), who had started an archeological program in and around Austin
nearly 10 years earlier. In such a situation, given Dr. Ray’s energy and convictions, it was only a matter of time before he would call together a group of
interested persons in Abilene and propose the organization of a scientific
society for the study of archeology.

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

161

In October 1928, Dr. Ray and Mr. Sayles invited to his office 23 persons,
most of them on the faculties of McMurry College and Simmons University in
Abilene, to come to an organizational meeting of an archeological society. On
the chilly evening of October 2, nine of them came to the meeting.
Accounts vary as to who the nine were, since most of those who were
invited but did not come were present at later meetings. There is understandable confusion in P eo p le’s me mones
’
as to who was at which meeting. However, we can be sure of a few who were on hand at this first meeting. They
were to be among the principal figures in the forthcoming society during its
early decades¯
Curry (W.C.) Holden was there, a professor of history at McMurry who
had excavated in Panhandle sites the previous summer¯ He would soon
move to Texas Technological College in Lubbock, where he would become a
well known teacher and author in archeology and anthropology. E.B. "Ted"
Sayles was Dr. Ray’s principal associate in archeological work. He later became a professional archeologist with Gila Pueblo, a research institution in
Arizona.
Rupert N. Richardson was a professor of history at Simmons¯ Later, he
was President of the school after it became Hardin-Simmons University. He
was to be active as an officer of the forthcoming archeological society during
its first 20 years¯ Otto O. Watts, a professor at Simmons, was to be one of Dr.
R ay ’ s strongest supporters in the administration of the society, especially in
his service as Secretary-Treasurer in the 1930’s and 1940’s. Julius Olsen,
physicist and dean at Simmons, was later the vice president of the society.
Frank Grimes, printer and newspaper publisher in Abilene, was to be a vital
although unobtrusive figure in the society’s publication program.
One of the principal impressions retained by those who were at this meeting seems to have been not what was accomplished but how cold it was that
evening. Natural gas heating had just come to Abilene, replacing coal and
wood. Dr. Ray installed in his office a small gas heater that was pathetically
inadequate to cope with the effects of an early fall norther blowing outside.
Many of the people there had to keep on their coats and hats¯
The minutes of the meeting, now in the records of the Texas Archeological Society, say that Dr. Ray, evidently undeterred by the arctic conditions,

¯ . ¯ outlined the objects of the meeting, the objects for which an archeological society is
generally formed, and briefly described the evidences of an archeo ogical nature that exist
nearby in Abilene. After a general discussion.., it was the opinion that an archeological
society should be formed covering that part of the state approximately that is covered by

the activities of the West Texas Historical Association. On motion, it was decided that the
society should be called The West Texas Archeological Society and regular meetings held
on the first Tuesday of each month . . ,

It was planned that a Constitution and By-Laws would be drawn up for adoption at the next meeting, which was to be a month later in November.
Matters moved more rapidly than expected, because a special meeting
was called only a week later, on October 8, at which a Constitution and ByLaws were adopted. It was agreed that
¯ . . the Society would be organized permanently, but the charter would be held open
until such time as invitations could be sent to likely interested persons in other sections of
the state.

With this, serious organizational work began¯ More than 75 formal notes
were sent to teachers of social and natural sciences in colleges in West Texas,

162

Texas Archeological Society

as determined by the catalogs of the colleges. Forty two letters were sent to
people personally known to members of the founding group. These persons
were invited to become charter members. The personal letters were found to
elicit the best response. At the November meeting, it was announced that the
society had 35 members. Nineteen were from Abilene and 16 were people
from other parts of the state who had responded to letters. (This second
regular meeting, incidentally, had to be held on the first Monday of the month
rather than the agreed on first Tuesday because the first Tuesday was the day
of a national election; Herbert Hoover was about to be elected President).
The lack of response from college people in West Texas and the more
positive reaction from elsewhere in the state suggested to the founders that
the society might have to be a statewide organization rather than being limited
to West Texas. The group at the November meeting agreed to continue the
membership campaign by writing again to those who had not replied to the
previous personal letters and write to others around the state. In addition,
four Regional Vice Presidents were elected from cities in different parts of the
state: San Antonio, Austin, Lubbock, and Alpine.
The functions of the society were also expanded at this time by the formation of three divisions: Anthropological (under Dr. Holden), Historical (Dr.
Richardson), and Paleontological (Dr. Olsen). These three persons made up
the Program Committee, with the responsibility of outlining the society’s work
during the forthcoming year.
With these moves, the name "West Texas Archeological Society" was
becoming inappropriate. At the January meeting, the three month old society
changed its name to The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
(TAPS), thus declaring its state wide mission. Thereafter, it was usually re~
ferred to by its initials, TAPS. The term Paleontological was added to the
earlier name in recognition of the interests of Drs. Olsen and Ray. It remained
in the title until 1952, although the orientation of the society was always
largely archeological. Since 1952, the name has been The Texas Archeological Society (TAS).
This chronicle of events, beginning with the discovery of fossil bison bones
at Colorado City and culminating with the organization of TAPS, gives the
impression that the founding of the Society was a unique event, a distinctly
Texan happening. There is no evidence in the records that Dr. Ray and his
friends were consciously following the example of any other organization
except possibly the West Texas Historical Association. If they were influenced
by knowledge of any other archeological societies, they did not mention it
then or later.
Still, one wonders how Dr. Ray drew up his statement for the first meeting
regarding "the objects for which an archeological society is generally formed."
Although there were few precedents for him to consult, one of them was not
far away in New Mexico, which had a state archeological society since the turn
of the century. However, the New Mexico society was closely affiliated with
the Museum of New Mexico, the School of American Research, and the
Santa Fe Society of the Archaeological Institute of America. This society
could not have provided a very useful model for the lonely Abilene group.
Still nearer were the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society in Canyon,
founded in 1921; and the West Texas Historical and Scientific Society in
Alpine (not the same as the West Texas Historical Society in Abilene),

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

163

founded in 1925. Both these societies included archeology as one of their
interests. But no mention is made of them in accounts of the founding of
TAPS. We are left not knowing that inspiration Dr. Ray and his friends may
have derived from other archeological organizations in setting up their own.
The appearance of TAPS in 1928-1929 was certainly not an isolated
event. Serious lay concern with archeology, as contrasted with simple relic
collecting, was growing in the U.S. at that time. An example is the founding
(1933) of the Eastern States Archeological Federation only a few years after
TAPS. The Federation grew out of the joint interests of a number of state and
local societies that were founded along the eastern seaboard.
Editors of Scientific American must have detected this rising interest.
They were publishing articles on archeology as a science rather than as a
search for pyramids and pots. Harold Cook’s report on the Colorado City
discovery was an example. Such articles, in turn, served to stimulate more
public interest.
Therefore, in founding the Society, Cyrus Ray and his friends were really
participating in a number of wider movements. Most directly, they appear to
have been following the example of the West Texas Historical Association
and the century old Anglo-American tradition of local, learned societies. Less
obviously, they were part of an American movement, the growing interest in
the 1920’s and 1930’s in scientific archeology.
The movement affected other prominent early TAPS members such as
Victor J. Smith, Floyd Studer, and W.C. Holden. They turned to archeological publications about New Mexico and Arizona in order to find materials with
which to compare their Basket Maker-like and Pueblo-like finds in the TransPecos and Panhandle areas.
Once established, the little society in Abilene set about to hold monthly
meetings, at each of which a paper or papers would be presented. Apparently, discussions continued about the best way to organize matters. In
addition to the name change to TAPS, the formal structure of the society was
revised several times during the first winter. The Executive Committee was
renamed the Board of Directors and nine Trustees were elected, six from
Abilene and three from other parts of the state. By June (1929), the structure
was set and a final Constitution and By-Laws were adopted.
When one considers how small the Society was (barely 100 people in a
state whose population was then approaching 6,000,000), these organizational matters seem little more than ceremonial in interest. But, this basic
organizational framework of Officers, Trustees, Directors, and Regional Vice
Presidents (all of them actually serving as a support structure for the figure at
the center, Dr. Cyrus Ray), provided the basis for the continuation of the
Society as its influence grew in subsequent years.
Apparently the monthly meetings were discontinued after June (1929),
and the program with its anthropological, historical, and paleontological divisions soon also disappeared from the record. The Society was not dying, but
its nature was changing from that of a local discussion group.
An important new activity was beginning. The innovation was first mentioned in April when, according to the minutes, "Mr. Grimes moved, Watts
seconded, that the directors be authorized to look into the matter of publishing a year book . . ." This represented a decision that publication was essential if the Society was to make a significant contribution to archeology. We can

164

Texas Archeological Society

see Dr. Ray’s initiative here as well as his approach: observe, read, study, and
publish. But the membership also must have supported this policy, since most
of them were academicians who lived in a world of technical and scholarly
publications. Frank Grimes, who made the original motion, was in the business of publishing.
But what was the Society to publish? Dr. Ray went to work. Having just
written an article for Scientific American, he produced another on his studies
in the Abilene area for the new publication. He successfully applied pressure
on five other Society members to contribute reports of their own. W.C.
Holden described his work in the Canadian River ruins. M.L. Crimmins (San
Antonio) discussed the archeology of the Trans-Pecos and El Paso areas.
E.B. Sayles wrote on types of sites in the Abilene area. George Martin (Rockport) told of finds on the lower Texas coast; and R.N. Richardson contributed
an article on the ethnohistory and ethnography of the Comanche. Thus,
there was enough material for a good publication.
Ted Sayles worked on the illustrations and Frank Grimes set up the format. With their aid, Dr. Ray edited and produced a 76 page Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society (BTAPS), appearing in October 1929. In choosing the name Bulletin, Dr. Ray implied that it was to be
the first of a series, as indeed it turned out to be. Uncharacteristically, he did
not have the confidence to call that first issue what it is now called, Volume I of
the Bulletin.
The state of archeology in Texas in the late 1920’s made the inauguration
of the Bulletin especially opportune. Archeological work in the state was not
new, but it had progressed very slowly. In the late 1920’s, it was beginning to
increase; and the Bulletin both reflected and encouraged the change of pace.
It will be well to review very briefly the situation of Texas archeology at this
time. The founder of serious archeological studies in the state was Professor
J.E. Pearce (University of Texas). He instituted an excavation program in
Central Texas burned rock middens as early as 1918.
A summary of Texas archeology that he published in American Anthropologist (1919) served mainly to show how little work had been done, a
circumstance that he explained in two ways. First, the treaty by which Texas
joined the Union left the state without Federal lands so that the Federal government had no responsibility to pursue research. Second, the traditional
hostility of Texans towards Indians had caused the removal of all but a handful of Indians from the state; no living aboriginal cultures were left whose
history someone might be stimulated to investigate.
Professor Pearce had few funds to support his work. However, during the
1920’s, he systematically built up a file of information from throughout the
state by means of questionnaires, letters, and field trips. Meanwhile, he carried on minor excavations in Central Texas burned rock middens. By 1929,
he believed he had established a sequence of three different cultures. By this
time, he had begun receiving Rockefeller funds to support his excavations
and was soon to extend his work to East Texas and the coast.
Meanwhile Floyd Studer, a businessman who lived in the town of Canadian and later in Amarillo, had taken an interest in the pueblo-like ruins on the
Canadian River (Antelope Creek Focus of the Panhandle Aspect). He had
been studying them since before 1910 and had guided a number of archeologists from northeastern institutions on tours of the sites. One of these visitors,

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

165

Dr. Warren King Moorehead (Phillips Academy), worked at the sites in 1919
and 1920~ and later (1931) published a major report. Dr. W.C. Holden began conducting excavations in Panhandle ruins in 1928~ his initial report
appeared in the first BTAPS.
The dry rock shelters and pictographs of the lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos
attracted field parties of some eastern institutions as early as 1909, when
Charles Peabody (Harvard University) made a brief visit. By the late 1920’s,
several excavations had taken place, but little information was published.
Not long before TAPS was founded, Victor J. Smith, head of the Department of Industrial Education at Sul Ross State Teacher’s College in Alpine,
began a continuing program of excavation in the shelters. He was instrumental in the formation (1925) of the West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
and Director of the museum at Sul Ross that housed the Society’s materials.
A self taught archeologist of perception and increasing skill, he carried out
a series of systematic excavations that eventually were to be stratigraphically
controlled. He was comparing the materials with the Basket Maker culture of
the Colorado Plateau to see whether there was cultural continuity between
the two areas. A brief descriptive statement of his finds was published in
American Anthropologist (1927). His reports soon began appearing in
BTAPS.
Elsewhere around the state, there were amateurs who were going beyond
the mere collection of artifacts to the recording of sites. For these people, the
opportunity to communicate through the Bulletin was especially important.
On the lower Gulf Coast, for instance, A.E. Anderson (Brownsville) and
George Martin were doing work. Martin wrote an article on his work for the
first BTAPS. Other amateurs elsewhere in the state made similar contributions in later bulletins.
The most striking gap apparent in this review was East Texas. Mounds,
burials, and village sites of the prehistoric ancestors of the Caddo Indians
provided an enormous potential for archeological research. Other than the
records that Professor Pearce was collecting in Austin, there is little indication
that anyone was taking a serious interest in the archeology of East Texas. That
area was still the exclusive province of the pot-hunters. However, Professor
Pearce was soon to send field parties to the Caddo country.
The articles in the first BTAPS reflected the state of Texas archeology.
They were mainly concerned with the description of sites and artifacts, an
appropriate subject where archeological work is relatively new. But Texas
needed to catch up with the rest of the country. Most of American archeology
had moved out of the purely descriptive stage more than 10 years earlier. The
field was in what Willey and Sabloff, in A History of American Archaeology,
called the chronological part of the Cultural-Historical stage.
Simple description of sites and artifacts had given way to a concern with
ordering them in time. This approach was exemplified by Kidder’s stratigraphic work at Pecos Pueblo and the formulation of the Pecos Classification
of prehistoric Pueblo cultures that resulted from the first Pecos Conference
(1927). The most active areas of archeological research on the continent
were the Southwest and Meso-America. Elsewhere, scientific archeology,
emphasizing stratigraphy, was beginning~ a concern with context came later.
Texas was scarcely part of this scene in the late 1920’s. Professor Pearce,
with his three culture sequence in Central Texas burned rock middens, in-

166

Texas Archeological Society

deed was concerned with stratigraphy and chronology. Unfortunately, his
methods of documentation were such that the sequence could not be verified
from his records. It was more than 20 years before anyone was able to test his
chronology. Elsewhere in the state, the time dimension was acknowledged
only in the use of Puebloan trade sherds to date West Texas and Panhandle
sites; no local sequences were yet being developed.
It was time for the Bulletin, a vehicle which could provide a means
whereby archeologists in Texas could communicate with one another and
with archeologists outside the state. The Bulletin, together with annual meetings that began at the same time it first appeared, transformed the year old
Society from a minor group of hobbyists to an organization that was to be
taken seriously in the state.
The state wide coverage of the articles in the first Bulletin made it clear that
TAPS would function not as a local Abilene group but as a truly state wide
society. The tone and quality of the articles emphasized that this was not to be
a pot-hunter’s journal. Few copies went outside Texas until later (the roster of
TAPS members in 1929 lists no one with a non-Texas address except for
Albert Ingalls, Associate Editor of Scientific American, whom Dr. Ray made
an Honorary Member). However, the Bulletin made Texas archeology a
manifestation of the nation wide movement toward the scientific study of the
past.
Looking back, Dr. Ray (1938:5) wrote:
Our only excuse for action was that no one else would do the job, and that however
poorly we functioned we did have a sincere desire to collect and to preserve for future
generations the ancient artifacts and fossils of Texas, and with them the records of ancient
life, before the destructive agencies even then operating could deface them,

The key phrase is "and with them the records of ancient life." Dr. Ray was
always concerned with the meaning of what he found, not with the simple
collection of objects. Although he had no formal training in archeological
recording, and it is often difficult to combine evidence from his different reports into a single picture, he was clearly ahead of most of his Texas colleagues in his concern with stratigraphy and context. This concern was reflected not only in his reports but in the tone and standards he set for the
Bulletin.
Thus, with little experience but an abundance of energy, conviction, and
common sense, Dr. Ray created a journal that was eventually to become one
of the standard references in American archeology.
Almost as remarkable as the scientific accomplishment represented by the
publication of the Bulletin was the economic feat for which it stood. The
Bulletin came out in October 1929, the month the New York stock market
collapsed and a catastrophic worldwide depression set in. The market for an
archeological bulletin was minuscule. Money was short and one could not
expect that Texans at that time would feel a need for a collection of papers on
local prehistory.
TAPS membership decided that dues would be $3.00. To pay for the
Bulletin, more members would be needed. The Abilene group was active in
soliciting memberships from around the state. Cyrus Ray adopted a more
direct approach. He took to the streets of downtown Abilene, collaring businessmen and importuning them to join the Society on the grounds that the
Bulletin and Society would bring desirable publicity to the city.

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

167

According to people who remember his activities, a number of businessmen were convinced by the argument and became members (that is, they
bought a Bulletin); others joined simply to get rid of the persistent Dr. Ray.
Evidently his tactics were successful: of the 103 members listed in the fall of
1929, 73 were from Abilene.
One who remembers the Society at that time, Bill Wright, later wrote
about the Abilene members that "Many of them didn’t know an artifact from
an artichoke and cared less." Nevertheless, the Abilene business community
continued to provide the main financial support for the Society for many
years, despite the ravages of the Great Depression. There may well be early
copies of the Bulletin in mint condition resting in Abilene attics, testimony to
Cyrus Ray’s ability to squeeze three dollars from his hapless fellow townsmen.
The Bulletin was the Society’s principal contribution to American archeology as a whole. But within the state, it was accompanied by an equally
important second contribution, the annual meeting. The monthly meetings of
the Society had continued during the first winter and spring (1928-1929); but
apparently ended with the June meeting, the next recorded gathering being
an annual meeting on October 26. At this meeting, it was decided that there
would be Program Meetings in Abilene in December, February, and March of
each year and an annual meeting on the last Saturday in October.
There is not a record as to how long the program meetings continued to be
held. They would have been attended by people from the vicinity of Abilene,
but probably not by persons from farther afield because of the distances involved. As the Society became more clearly a state society, the annual meeting became the important gathering.
This meeting shared with the Bulletin the function of disseminating archeological information among interested persons in the state, allowing personal contacts to be made that were otherwise not possible. When Professor
Pearce wrote his annual account of archeological activity in Texas for the
American Anthropologist in 1930-1931, he said that much of his information
came from reports at the annual meeting of the Society in Abilene. Recognition of the scientific importance of the Society was spreading.
Even more striking recognition came after the publication of Volume 2 of
the Bulletin (1930). Evidently, Dr. Ray sent a copy to the editor of the American Anthropologist. In 1931, that journal carried a brief review of the Bulletin
to inform American anthropologists of a new regional publication. The review
was written by A.L. Kroeber (University of California at Berkeley), who was
then on his way to becoming the most renowned of American anthropologists.
In Kroeber’s review, he briefly summarized the contents of Volume 2,
mentioning that papers were "nearly all based on new data." Then he commented,
It is clear that Texas, like California and the Atlantic slope, is rich in ancient remains,
although not in general of a showy or "attractive" type, and that regional variation is
definite. With the complete disappearance of local ethnology, the archaeology becomes
doubly significant. After all, what tie-up the ancient Southwest and Southeast had, should
have existed chiefly in this state. The society is to be congratulated on its efforts and
results, and wished wider support for its important endeavors.

By 1931, the Society and its Bulletin already had national attention in the
archeological profession. Recognition of this sort would not have come if the
Bulletin were a mere collector’s journal. Dr. Ray knew almost instinctively

168

Texas Archeological Society

what constituted reputable archeology and how it differed from purely artifact
oriented work. He did have the collector’s love of Good Pieces~ but he was
always asking about the meaning of things and demanding evidence.
At the very least, the submitters of articles to the Bulletin were obliged to
report data carefully and dispassionately. "Our publication," he wrote in an
editorial in the 1933 Bulletin, "is independent and is open to any scientist,
great or small, who has really found something and is reliable and accurate in
his descriptions." As a result of this policy, Dr. Ray produced an annual
publication that was worthy of serious attention.
The first five years of the Bulletin reflect gradually mounting archeological
interest and activity around the state. Professional activity was increasing~ but
in all likelihood, the stimulus of the Society was responsible for what appears
to have been a concurrent increase in careful amateur work. A number of
persons became regular contributors to the first five volumes.
Victor J. Smith reported on his continuing work in Trans-Pecos shelters.
His analyses were careful and conservative; his descriptions and documentations are useful even today. He demonstrated that the term Big Bend Basketmaker that had been applied to the Trans-Pecos materials was not appropriate. There were specific and significant differences between the Basketmaker
Culture of the Colorado Plateau several hundred miles to the northwest and
the material culture of the Trans-Pecos sites in which he was working.
W. C. Holden, who moved from McMurry College to Texas Technological College in 1929, was reporting on work in the Panhandle ruins as was
Floyd Studer. By now, they could tell that these sites were significantly different from the Pueblos to the west. They were laying the foundations for later
work showing that the Panhandle ruins were built by Plains Indians whose
architectural ideas were influenced by the Pueblos.
George Martin wrote about finds on the lower Texas coast, and later
about his explorations of rock shelters in the Lower Pecos country for the
Witte Museum (San Antonio). A. E. Anderson added his observations on the
lower coast. Eileen R. Alves (El Paso) wrote perceptive descriptions of materials in far West Texas and neighboring New Mexico.
E. B. Sayles helped Dr. Ray with the Bulletin and wrote on sites in the
Abilene area. Eventually, he was hired by H. R. Gladwin, Gila Pueblo research institution in Globe (Arizona), to make a general survey of the arm
cheology of Texas, the first of its kind. Gladwin hoped to find connections
between southwestern cultures and the Caddo of the Southeast. No such
connections were found~ but Sayles’ A Survey of Texas Archeology (1935)
remains a landmark.
There were other contributors, and always prominent among them was
Dr. Ray. Every Bulletin carried a report by him. He was investigating stone
cist graves in the Abilene area and finding skeletal remains in them that he felt
were of an unusual primitive type. Experts differed with him; he published
their opinions but did not change his mind about his primitive people. He also
continued his exploration of the high cut banks of the Brazos and its tributaries
in search of sites of Pleistocene cultures.
BTAPS reflected the archeological development in Texas. In its early
years, the articles were devoted largely to descriptions of kinds of sites and
types of artifacts, the raw materials of archeology. Although professional

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

169

American archeology was well into its Classificatory-Historical period, Texas
archeologists first had to gather and describe their data. They did not ignore
the time dimension. Professor Pearce saw cultural changes in the layers of the
Central Texas burned rock middens~ Dr. Ray was very much concerned with
the relative ages of his sites. But for the most part, field evidence concerning
chronology was not prominent in the early issues of the Bulletin. However,
Dr. Ray could be counted on to do more than describe. He thought about
what he saw, analyzed, read the pertinent literature, and drew inferences.
Dr. Ray was determined that Texas, the Society, and the Bulletin would
make a mark. He urged the leading professional in the state, Professor
Pearce, to report on what he was doing. Professor Pearce eventually obliged
with a 10 page article on "The Present Status of Texas Archeology" in Volume 4 (1932). In the same volume was an article by E. B. Howard (University of Pennsylvania), a Paleoindian specialist at a time when few such specialists existed. He described work on Pleistocene caves in the Guadalupe
Mountains.
At this time (1932), the four year old society had 105 members, one less
than in 1929. However, the number of non-Abilene members was slowly
growing, there being 11 more than in 1929. Dr. Ray’s pressure on the business community of Abilene continued to provide 60% of the Society’s income. Slowly, however, the state wide character of the organization was
becoming felt in the makeup of the membership.
Dr. Ray was reaching out even further. By now, he was corresponding
with archeologists all over the country and urging those who might know
something pertinent to Texas archeology to submit articles to the Bulletin.
W. K. Moorehead (Peabody Foundation, Massachusetts) had a paper about
the Panhandle ruins in Volume 5~ Harold S. Gladwin discussed "The Archeology of the Southwest and its Relation to the Cultures of Texas" in Volume 6; and J. Alden Mason (University of Pennsylvania) wrote on "The
Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships Between the United States
and Mexico" in Volume 7, following it with more discussion in Volume 9. All
of these people were nationally prominent archeologists.
Dr. Ray also sent specimens from his work in the Abilene area for analysis
by experts elsewhere in the country, requesting reports that he could publish.
Volume 5 contained "Notes on Five Texas Crania" by Dr. E. A. Hooton
(Harvard), then the nation’s leading physical anthropologist. Dr. Hooton
analyzed a number of skulls that Dr. Ray had excavated and decided that they
were American Indians. Although he did not say so explicitly, he saw no
indication that they were of a peculiar primitive race as Dr. Ray felt.
Dr. Ray continued to believe this despite a later report (Volume 10) by Dr.
Ales Hrdlicka (Smithsonian Institution), repeating the judgement that they
were definitely Indians. It was characteristic of Cyrus Ray that he often
published opinions that were contrary to his own, although in such cases he
was likely to add editorial comments reiterating his feelings. In Volume 7, Dr.
James B. Griffin (University of Michigan) contributed a "Report on Pottery
Sherds from Near Abilene, Texas" which included a temper analysis of the
pottery of Frederick R. Matson. Both these men were to become internationally known in their fields.
In addition, Dr. Ray invited archeologists to inspect his deeply buried sites

170

Texas Archeological Society

along the upper Brazos and reported in the Bulletin on their visits. Dr. Walter
Hough (U.S. National Museum) came in 1929. Dr. A. E. Jenks (University
of Minnesota) came the same year (before the "Minnesota Man" discovery
made him internationally famous) and again in 1939. Much later (1946), Dr.
Carl Sauer, the great geographer from the University of California (Berkeley),
came. Dr. Kirk Bryan, the Harvard geomorphologist who pioneered the field
of geological studies in archeology, came in 1938. During his visit, a Folsomlike point was found in one of the sites associated with a mammoth skeleton.
He and Dr. Ray collaborated on a report of the find in Volume 10.
In the early 1940’s, a prominent archeologist (my recollection is that the
story teller was Dr. Alfred Vincent Kidder, then honored as the leading
American archeologist) told of having met Dr. Ray. Some years before, this
archeologist had found himself in Abilene with time on his hands. Such was
the reputation of Dr. Ray that the archeologist realized he should take this
chance to meet the well known Texan.
He went to Dr. Ray’s office and found himself seated in a line of people in
the waiting room. One by one, the patients went into an inner room, from
which (so the account went) emanated grunts, groans, and thuds; the patient
then emerging as from a cement mixer. Finally, only the archeologist was left.
Out came Dr. Ray with his imposing physique, booming, "Are you next, sir?"
The archeologist claimed, in telling the story, that he narrowly escaped being
caught in an osteopathic hammerlock. But, he persuaded Dr. Ray that the
subject at hand was archeology rather than infirmity and they had a fine visit.
Such was Cyrus Ray’s renown in the land.
By 1936, the Bulletin, then in its eighth volume, had come of age. Two
hundred pages long, it was by now a major source of information on many
archeological subjects and no longer limited to kinds of sites and types of
artifacts.
One of the new subjects appearing in the Bulletin was the archeology of
East Texas and vicinity, the Caddoan archeological area. A. T. Jackson (University of Texas) was publishing a long series of articles on his finds in East
Texas. Mr. Jackson, without formal training but gifted with a systematic and
orderly mind, great energy, common sense, and an excellent command of
written English, saw to it that his work in Caddo sites would not go unpublished. The Bulletin was his outlet.
Walter Goldschmidt, a graduate student at the University of Texas, contributed an important paper on Titus County sites in 1935 (he went on to
become one of the country’s leading cultural anthropologists). Judge Harry
Lemley and his colleague S. D. Dickson (Arkansas) began publishing a series
of contributions on the archeology of southwestern Arkansas, relating Caddoan archeology to the prehistory of the Mississippi Valley.
In addition, Adolph Henry Witte (Henrietta) wrote articles on archeological evidences in North Texas; and R. King Harris (Dallas), who would eventually become the dean of Texas amateurs, first appears in Volume 8 with a
systematic statement on sites in the upper Trinity drainage, the first published
report on that subject.
Due to the quality of the Bulletin, its reputation was spreading as the
1930’s went on. The Society was not growing appreciably (total membership
was 113 in 1938) but its makeup was changing. Non-Abilene members from
Texas now outnumbered those from Abilene, 39 to 34. More striking is that

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

171

40 members were from outside Texas; 20 of them were libraries and museums (by contrast, only 10 libraries and museums within Texas got the Bulletin at that time). The Treasurer’s report shows that these institutions were
busily buying back issues of the Bulletin in order to get complete series. The
university libraries at Berkeley, Chicago, Columbia, Harvard, and Yale had
become members of the Society.
In keeping with this expanded distribution, Dr. Ray broadened the subject
matter of the Bulletin by soliciting articles on non-Texas subjects. By 1940, a
number of such articles had appeared. E. B. Renaud (University of Denver)
wrote several articles on Paleoindian point types. A. E. Jenks, Lloyd Wilford,
Kirk Bryan, and others reported in 1938 on the Sauk Valley skeleton in
Minnesota~ their reports are the basic published data on that possible Paleoindian find.
M. R. Harrington had a paper on the excavation of a pueblo site in the
basin of Lake Mead. Kirk Bryan also contributed (Volume 11, 1939) a report
on a quarry area near Cerro Pedernal (New Mexico). The paper is notable for
its completeness, detail, and sophistication of description and analysis. It also
had illustrations of flaked artifacts executed by the scratchboard technique,
the first time such illustrations had been used in a publication.
New and important names were appearing in the Bulletin in the late
1930’s. Forrest and Lula Kirkland, a husband and wife team of Dallas commercial artists, became interested in prehistoric rock art of Texas as the result
of a visit to the pictographs at Paint Rock in Concho County. They found that
much of the art was deteriorating and in danger of being lost.
Beginning in 1934, they spent their vacations in the field, making accurate copies of rock art in the lower Pecos River country and other parts of
the state. In 1937, BTAPS carried the first of a series of careful and detailed
articles on the subject by Mr. Kirkland. These illustrated articles were the only
available source on the work of the Kirklands until the eventual publication
(1967) of The Rock Art of Texas Indians, in which many of the Kirkland
paintings were reproduced with an accompanying text by W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
Dr. Clarence H. Webb made his first contribution to the Bulletin in 1939.
It was a report (co-authored with Monroe Dodd) on the Gahagan Mound, a
Caddo site in Louisiana made famous in part by this report. Dr. Webb, in
addition to being a prominent pediatrician in Shreveport and eventually the
President of the American College of Pediatrics, was to become one of the
leading authorities on Caddoan archeology. BTAPS was a principal outlet for
his published work. He also helped Dr. Ray by editing the Bulletin material
that pertained to the Caddoan area.
While the Bulletin expanded its range of subjects and its body of contributors, Dr. Ray saw to it that the old society stalwarts continued to appear: such
persons as Victor J. Smith~ Curry Holden, who was extending his studies into
the cultural anthropology of the Yaqui Indians of northern Mexico~ Col.
M. L~ Crimmins, who wrote on Mexican archeology; and of course the ever
prolific editor and publisher of the Bulletin, Cyrus Ray.
Dr. Ray was a many faceted man who pursued a number of technical
avocations in addition to archeology. He admired persons whose activities
were as varied as his own. He took the opportunity to express his feelings on
the subject in the course of a review of J. T. Patterson’s The Corner-Tang

172

Texas Archeological Society

Hint Artifacts of Texas, in Volume 8 (1936). Dr. Patterson was a biologist
(University of Texas) who made Texas Indian artifacts his hobby and
published a number of papers on the subject.
After reviewing the publication, Dr. Ray unburdened himself in characteristic combative fashion:
¯ . . the world’s lay and incompetent ever increasing legions, who never in their whole
lives have done anything well, have an untrue saying to comfort their wounded vanity
when they hear of someone doing several things well. It runs thus: ’He is a jack of all
trades, and a master of none.’ Literally the contrary of that saying is always true. Any
person who can do one thing well, can do a half dozen other things equally well. The one
who does not have sufficient brains and energy to do a half dozen other things well, does
not have sufficient to do one thing well. The average man is extremely lazy, and wastes in
entertainment or as a spectator of others’ activities, enough time to learn several fanguages, acquire skill as a painter, sculptor, astronomer, botanist, or proficiency in any of
several other arts and sciences.
One wonders what the progress of the world would be, were all to turn to constructive
amusements and hobbies.

It can be seen that when Cyrus Ray felt strongly on a subject, as he often
did, he could deliver cannonades that reverberated across the West Texas
plains. Another such example came in connection with the small number of
museums in Texas, a subject that concerned him a great deal ("One of the
society’s major objectives," he wrote in Volume 4, introducing a list of Texas
museums and their exhibits, "is the building and proper maintenance of museums in Texas").
Late in the 1930’s, he raised money in the name of the Society for several
museum cases to be installed in the West Texas Resource and Museum Institute in Abilene to hold the archeological materials he and his friends had
found. In Volume 9 (1937), he wrote an editorial entitled "Texas should
retain its scientific finds," pointing out that if good museums were not built in
the state, all the specimens would go elsewhere. There was enough money in
the state, he said, to build a museum the equal of those in the East.
Millions of Texas money is going into grandstand sports [he wrote], and carnivalistic
exhibitions of doubtful, if not harmful values, and into other such trivial things, while
practically no provision is being made for visual education... The schools of Texas will
never be what they should be until they provide museums so that the minority who really
desire an education in something aside from football, will be enabled to get the exact
knowledge to which they are entitled. Properly educate these few, and the mass of those
who throng our educational institutions can well be left to their own devices, because from
these few alone will proceed all of the future culture, progress and development of Texas.
The world is already doing too much for the never-do-wells, the misfits, the lazy louts, and
the enemies of Democracy. It needs to seek out and comb the population for the worthy,
industrious, and talented few, and really give them the opportunity to fully capitalize their
talents. As it is now whenever an unusually brilliant person develops in Texas we have
provided an environment which usually causes him to leave for New England or other
eastern States, where he finds both the encouragement and the physical equipment with
which to carry forward his research. As a State we need something to awaken us to the
fact that daily our mental resources slip away from us.

Dr. Ray’s feelings reflected the situation in the state, at least as far as
archeology was concerned. Until the late 1930’s, Texas archeological work,
although expanding rapidly, continued to be relatively isolated from the
mainstream of American archeology. A principal reason was financial. The
budgets of colleges and museums in the state did not allow for jobs that would
attract trained people from outside. In general, the archeological publications
appearing in the state in the 1930’s show little familiarity with the thinking that

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

173

was developing almost explosively in neighboring areas such as the lower
Mississippi Valley, Central Plains, and Southwest on such subjects as stratigraphy, seriation, typology, and cultural classification.
Dr. Ray shared in this ignorance, but he was aware of its crippling effects
and its broader causes. He was not quiet about it. He was a believer in the vital
role of an intellectual elite, the small group of gifted and hardworking persons
who carried the burden of civilization for the ignorant, indolent masses. He
occasionally took the opportunity to lecture his readers on the importance of a
social system that would select and encourage the Talented and Industrious
Few. In this respect he found Texas lacking.
In a review of Professor Pearce’s Tales that Dead Men Tell, in Volume 7,
he remarked:
Some of Dr. Pearce’s observations on the effect of superstitions doubtless will offend
some of the Texas brands of Whirling Dervishes. The book will make one think, and to
many that is an unforgivable offense. When we knock on the door of an empty house all
we get is an empty sound, but when one knocks at the door of an empty mind all the bats
of prejudice and hate fly out in one’s face.

The vehemence with which Dr. Ray wrote on these matters makes clear
his love of combat; but also with his interest in prehistory0 he had to put up
with a good deal of intolerant sniping. Potshots came from acquaintances
who saw no point in his spending time and effort studying the past or from
those who felt that his archeological findings were doing violence to biblical
truths. While Dr. Ray charged into the fray with gusto and eloquence, one
can see that behind the gladiatorial facade was a man deeply wounded because so many people did not appreciate his scientific work which he felt he
was carrying on in the interest of humanity.
In some of his writing, an even further feeling of injury can be detected.
There was a suspicion that the professional archeologists were not taking his
field work in the Abilene area as seriously as he felt the ~vork deserved. In
reality, the problem was one of personality and of techniques of reporting. It
was easier for the Texas professionals to acknowledge their profound debt to
Dr° Ray for the Bulletin and the annual meetings than to get involved in his
Abilene work. But it was natural that he would be particularly proud of his
original and by no means unimportant discoveries in the field. He would feel
especially hurt that the archeologists whose work he envied would seem, to
him, not to share in his excitement about his own contributions.
But strikingly, these feelings rarely appeared in the Bulletin except in
occasional editorial comments. Despite his aggressive, crusading attitude, Dr.
Ray was determined that the Bulletin would be a dispassionate journal dedicated to scientific reporting. He saw to it that his own prejudices and grievances did not influence his editorial work. Under these circumstances, it is not
surprising that the Bulletin’s reputation continued to spread in the American
archeological community, as is shown by the appearance in the annual membership lists of additional non-Texas research libraries and individual members.
It was in the late 1930’s that the new scientific developments in American
archeology began to be felt in Texas archeology. During the 1930’s, there was
an increase in both amateur and professional work. On the amateur side, the
growing interest was signalled by the appearance of several active local societies. The Dallas Archeological Society was founded in 1936 and began
publishing its journal, The Record, three years later. In Waco, the Central

174

Texas Archeological Society

Texas Archeological Society was founded about 1934. Frank H. Watt, a
printer and publisher, was responsible for issuing its bulletin, The Central
Texas Archeologist, as well as initiating much of its field work.
On the professional scene, the expansion of work was impressive. Initially, Professor Pearce was able to increase his field activities with the aid of
funds from a social sciences grant to the University of Texas from the Laura
Spelman Rockefeller Memorial. Later, the federal Works Progress Administration (WPA) financed a great deal of work in the basins of the Highland
Lakes above Austin and elsewhere in the state. A number of other institutions
were also carrying on work, such as the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
in Canyon, the West Texas Museum at Texas Technological College in Lubbock, and the Witte Museum in San Antonio.
Most of this work was done by skilled, conscientious, and experienced
men who had not had formal academic training in archeology. A striking
example was A. T. Jackson, whose field records and publications manifest a
marked degree of organization, detail, and clarity. At the same time, they
showed no awareness of stratigraphic method or the techniques of artifact
analysis that were being applied elsewhere in the country.
This situation was to begin changing late in the decade, due to the influence of Texans who went elsewhere for training and returned to work in
the state. The key figure in the change was Dr. J. Gilbert McAllister, originally
from San Antonio. After graduating from the University of Texas in 1928, he
had gone to the University of Chicago for his doctorate in anthropology and
returned to Austin to join the faculty of the University in 1935.
When Professor Pearce, the Grand Old Man of Texas Archeology, died in
1938, Dr. McAllister took over administration of the University’s archeological program and ran it until World War II brought it to a halt in 1942. Dr.
McAllister was primarily a cultural anthropologist, but had had archeological
training at Chicago.
A sign of his new approach was the hiring of highly trained field men to
excavate two major Caddoan sites, Hatchel and Davis. Those excavations
remain as milestones in Caddoan archeology. Dr. McAllister hired a brilliant
young west coast archeologist, Alex D. Krieger, to be laboratory supervisor
and later full time research archeologist. Krieger’s influence on Texas arm
cheology and TAPS was eventually to be profound. By bringing in new
blood, Dr. McAllister transformed Texas archeology.
Two other Texans who went out of the state to receive training were T. N.
Campbell and J. Charles Kelley. Campbell studied under Professor Pearce in
Austin and Kelley went to the Univeristy of New Mexico. Both of them went
on to pursue their doctorates at Harvard. As a result of research in the Big
Bend, they published (1940) the first archeological monograph to come out
of Texas that was comparable to the best studies elsewhere in the country,
The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in the
Big Bend Region of Texas. It was published in Alpine by Sul Ross State
Teachers College and the West Texas Historical and Scientific Society. By
that time, Kelley was teaching anthropology at Sul Ross and Campbell was
hired by Dr. McAllister to teach at Austin.
There were in actuality two exceptions (by 1940) to the generalization that
archeology elsewhere in the country was not having a noticeable effect on the
publications coming out of Texas. One of these was the work of Kelley and

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

175

Campbell in the Big Bend. The other is seen in BTAPS reports of an amateur,
Clarence Webb, which showed that he was working within the framework of
archeological concepts then being formulated in the lower Mississippi and
Red River Valleys by James A. Ford (American Museum of Natural History)
and his colleagues. This was particularly true in matters of cultural and artifact
classification.
Dr. Webb published his reports in the Bulletin because it was the only
available outlet. Cyrus Ray, recognizing quality, soon handed him the job of
editing all articles from the Caddoan area as a whole. As a result, the Bulletin
became a principal source of archeological data on Caddoan sites not only in
Texas, but in Lousiana and Arkansas (and later Oklahoma).
A sign of increasing concern with the professional quality of archeological
work in Texas was a conference on archeological methods that took place in
Alpine in 1939 at the meeting of the Southwestern Division of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science. At that conference, Dr. McAllister was given the task of forming a committee to examine archeological
methods being used in the state. From this committee grew the Council of
Texas Archeologists, a small organization specifically concerned with the
quality of research.
The committee was composed of both professionals and amateurs. All
but one of the committee members belonged to the Society. The first meeting
of the Council took place in connection with the annual meeting of TAPS
since that meeting was almost the only opportunity Texas archelogists had to
get together.
The Council of Texas Archeologists did not have time, in the brief period
between its founding and the entrance of the U.S. into World War II, to affect
markedly the course of archeology in the state. It did publish several issues of
a newsletter and established the use of the quadrangle system of numbering
sites, a uniform statewide system that was in use until the late 1950’s.
More important was the example it set of amateur-professional collaboration in scientific policy making. In most parts of the U.S., professionals and
amateurs, if they worked together at all, did not do so as closely as in Texas
and certainly not on as high a level. The almost routine collaboration that
went on in Texas was a direct result of 10 years of TAPS activity.
Although the Society was an organization primarily of non-professionals,
its history was also a part of the history of professional archeology in the state.
In its role as a vehicle of communication, it was vital to the professional community. Through the annual meetings and the Bulletin, it provided the principal means by which Texas archeologists were able to keep track of one
another’s research. Having firmly established itself in this role, by 1940, it had
set the important precedent that was to be a hallmark of the Society and of
Texas archeology in the years to come.
This situation appears even more striking when contrasted with that of the
Society for American Archaeology. This society was the principal national
organization, formed by professionals in 1935 for the sake of both professionals and amateurs. It was immediately swallowed by the professionals and
remained under their sole control ever since because of their acute need for
such an organization.
The professional need was just as strong in Texas, not only for TAPS but
in particular for the Bulletin, but there was no chance in the 1930’s that the

176

Texas Archeological Society

professionals would take over the organization. For one thing, they were few
in number and the non-professionals provided the financial base for the Bulletin. For another, professionals could not have taken over because amateurs, represented by the redoubtable Dr. Ray, were already firmly in the
saddle.
Thirdly, there was the social side of the annual meeting. The formal papers at the meeting were serious matters, but the meeting as a whole was
never marked by its solemnity. Old friends renewed their bonds and it was
irrelevant whether one was amateur or professional; everyone was there to
share a common interest and one another’s company. Over the years, an
esprit de corps developed, a powerful human factor that insured the Society
would maintain its function "in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking"
(in the words of the charter), asking its members not their formal training or
livelihood, but only what their archeological standards were.
As the 1940’s began, dues were $3.00, the same as when the Society
began. Although membership was not far over 100, Dr. Ray had about 300
copies of each Bulletin printed, so that back issues would be available for
purchase by new members. Volume 12 (1940) was 252 pages long. Membership in the Society was 132:32 from Abilene (the businessmen were still
supporting the Society), 56 from elsewhere in Texas (13 of these were institutions), 41 from other states (23 were institutions), and three from outside the
country (one person in Canada, the Instituto Panamericano de Geografia e
Historia in Mexico City, and the Societe des Americanistes in Paris). Members
such as Victor Smith, W. C. Holden, Forrest Kirkland, and Clarence Webb
were continuing their contributions to the Bulletin.
Volume 13 (1941) was smaller. The war in Europe was two years old and
the U.S. was more and more involved. Characteristically, Dr. Ray made no
mention of it. There were now 137 members, the highest number in the
Society’s history; 32 institutions outside Texas received the Bulletin.
When Volume 14 appeared in 1942, the U.S. had been at war for nearly
a year. Again, Dr. Ray kept war and science apart and made no mention of
the conflict. But the Bulletin was down to 161 pages; Dr. Ray was having
trouble finding authors. To keep the Bulletin full, three authors had written
two articles apiece. One of them was Forrest Kirkland, whose death after
writing his articles was sadly announced at the end of the volume, as was that
of Dr. Julius Olsen, one of the founders of the Society. A further departure
from the past was the presence of four paleontological articles in this Bulletin.
Membership did not decline significantly during the war so that the Society was never in financial trouble. However, by 1943, Dr. Ray had to acknowledge that it was not easy to keep the Bulletin going. Volume 15 was
only 121 pages long. Ray complained in an editorial note that the trouble lay
not in finances but in the inability of prospective authors to complete articles
because they were busy with war duties. Five persons who had promised to
submit papers were unable to send them in.
Nevertheless, he had no reason to apologize for Volume 15. It included a
fascinating paper by A. T. Jackson entitled "Indian Arrow and Lance
Wounds," pulling together useful evidence from historical and ethnohistorical
documents and archeological specimens. J. Walker Davenport (Witte Museum) had an enlightening, brief report on experiments with the atlatl. Dr.
and Mrs. T. L. Hodges (Arkansas) reported on the Watermelon Island site, a

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

177

major Caddoan site on the Ouachita River. These and other papers made this
wartime volume well worth Dr. Ray’s trouble.
But he was feeling the pressure of the war. In this Bulletin, he included an
editorial note entitled "Should War Stop Cultural and Scientific Research"
(the absence of a question mark presumably indicated that there was no
question in his mind). He replied to criticisms he was evidently getting from
friends in Abilene who felt that with the country at war, he should not be
spending time and money putting out an archeological publication.
Dr. Ray went at his critics with customary vigor, pointing out that one
cannot interrupt the existence of institutions in the hope that one can somehow pick them up again later. Since the Society was financially strong, there
was no reason that its publication program should be interrupted.
"Your Editor’s time," he declared, "is fully taken up during the daytime
hours with essential civilian duties and if he chooses to devote his recreational
periods to scientific and cultural activities, it is his own business, and this
course will be continued." People who feel otherwise, he noted, "probably
fear scientific research at all times, and war gives them an excuse to vent their
dislikes in moves of suppression." Cyrus Ray was not to be suppressed.
But unfortunately, not everyone could find time for science as Dr. Ray
could. The supply of manuscripts shriveled and the printer was occupied with
war work. It was not possible, despite adequate finances, to put out a Bulletin
in 1944. One can imagine Dr. Ray’s disappointment and frustration. He saw
himself as one of those people he had written about earlier: "Any person who
can do one thing well, can do a half dozen other things equally well." He
could not understand why other people could not do the same and complete
their archeological reports while doing their share in the war effort, But they
could not~ Volume 16 had to wait another year.
World War II ended in the summer of 1945. Dr. Ray bounced back with
an impressive Volume 16, 158 pages of informative and useful articles by
eight authors, including Dr. Ray. He looked back over nearly 25 years of
studying the stream silts in the Abilene region and reviewed the geologic
sequence he had worked out. Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr. (eminent Paleoindian specialist at the Smithsonian) reported on a deep burial on the Clear Fork
of the Brazos that he had investigated at Dr. Ray’s instigation. There were
other papers by R. K. Harris, Dr. and Mrs. Hodges, Dr.Webb, and Carl
Chelf.
For the first time, there appeared a paper by Alex D. Krieger, who had
joined the staff of the University of Texas shortly before the war. Ineligible for
military service because of deafness, he had spent the war years organizing
and analyzing materials in the Austin laboratory and in private collections in
East and North Texas. The results of this work were to appear in a series of
publications in the late 1940’s.
His paper in Volume 16 was on an elementary but extremely important
subject, the need to be specific in archeological terminology. The word
mound should not be used loosely, he said; it should be limited in use to
intentionally built structures. Similarly, such terms as arrowpoint, dart point,
and metate should be specific; standard terms for burial types, flexed, bundle,
etc., should be used. This article seemed, on first glance, to be directed at
amateurs, but in reality was aimed equally at the technical writing of professionals.

178

Texas Archeological Society

Dr. Ray, from his years of editorial experience, felt strongly about such
matters. He admired Krieger’s article very much and added an editorial comment of his own, excoriating the way many archeologists write. English fanguage publications are widely read in the world, he said, and we should use
words in their standard, dictionary meanings so that everyone will know what
we are saying; but archeologists are notorious for their loose handling of
terms.
He gave examples: John Smith "recovered" flint knives, even though he~
did not lose them; a burial is said to be "accompanied" by glass beads, even
though the beads are inanimate. But alas for the pursuit of exactitude[ It is with
apologies to the memory of a remarkable man that I point out his error in
taking issue with these two particular usages. A 1930’s dictionary (Webster’s
Collegiate Dictionary, 5th Ed., 1936) says that it is quite proper to use "accompany" in the sense of "to occur in association with," and one use of
"recover" is found in "to recover gold from ore."
In his general message, though, Dr. Ray was absolutely right; and when
he went on to lament "an overuse of quotation marks on questionable words
which the writer seeks to use, but yet wishes to disavow responsibility for,"
one could hear a murmur of approval from the overworked editors of the
world.
The war was over; and American archeology entered a new phase. The
federal water development program, which included plans for hundreds of
reservoirs on major streams, necessitated the creation of the nationwide InterAgency Archeological Salvage Program. This program involved federal,
state, and local agencies and institutions, dedicated to learning as much as
possible about the archeology of the areas to be inundated. Suddenly, for the
first time in the history of the profession, there were many jobs for archeologists and not enough trained archeologists to fill the jobs. In addition, on the
academic scene, research in archeology expanded as anthropology programs were founded or enlarged in colleges and universities across the country.
Texas shared in these developments. In Austin, the Smithsonian Institution set up a branch office of its reservoir salvage unit, the River Basin Surveys
(RBS), on the campus of the University of Texas. Robert L. Stephenson was
in charge. He initiated surveys and excavations in reservoir basins in many
parts of the state. One of the earliest major projects was his own in the basin of
Whitney Reservoir on the Brazos above Waco.
In another early RBS project, Joe Ben Wheat conducted several months
of salvage work in the Addicks Basin west of Houston. BTAPS came to serve
as the principal outlet for brief, and some major, reports of RBS work in
Texas. In this way, the Society was, as always, playing a key role in the
development of archeology in the state.
Meanwhile, Alex Krieger pulled together the results of his research and
published Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas (1946).
This monumental work suddenly placed him, and Texas, in the vanguard of
American archeological research. In this work, he defined the archeological
complexes from the Panhandle to Caddoan area. For the first time, cross
dating was carried out from sites in the Pueblo area, that were dated by
dendrochronology, to the cultural sequence in the lower Mississippi Valley.

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

1 79

Although dates were unavailable for the lower Mississippi Valley, a good deal
of Southeastern archeology depended on the cultural sequence for its relative
chronology.
Krieger’s achievement was all the more notable in that it was based not
only on systematic excavations by a number of workers over the years, but
also on analysis of many amateur collections that were documented. Few
American archeologists made as effective use of amateur work as Krieger did.
His dedication to the importance of amateur-professional cooperation was
soon to be important to TAPS.
T. N. Campbell and J. Charles Kelley came home from the war and took
up research and the training of students at the University of Texas. Campbell
specialized in Gulf Coast archeology and Kelley in Central Texas and the
Trans-Pecos. They organized the information from the excavations in the
1930’s into culture-historical frameworks that formed the basis for the work
that has gone on since that time.
In West Texas, W. C. Holden resumed work with a field school in rock
shelters along the Caprock, reported in the 1949 BTAPS. On the High
Plains, Paleoindian studies were underaken by E. H. Sellards, Glen Evans,
and Grayson Meade (Texas Memorial Museum) with excavations at Plainview, Lubbock Lake, and Blackwater Draw.
Thus, many parts of Texas were seeing intensive research by trained
archeologists for the first time. To these workers, their numbers seemed pitifully few and spread thin. However, their ability to concentrate days and
weeks of work on particular research problems and formal training in anthropology and North American archeology placed them in a position to take over
the basic research in many areas from the amateurs. The amateurs had been
up until then the custodians of local archeological knowledge and the
pioneers of local archeological research.
Of course, this does not mean the amateurs retired from the scene.
Rather, a new phase of collaborative work was beginning. The increased
professional work often served to stimulate amateur survey and excavation.
In the 1947 Bulletin, R. B. Worthington reported that the Houston Anthropological Society had been formed as the result of interest in Joe Ben Wheat’s
work at Addicks Basin. They planned to do further surveys at Addicks.
The Dallas Archeological Society reported in The Record that they were
cooperating with Robert Stephenson in his reservoir work in North Texas;
Alex Krieger had come up from Austin to speak at a meeting. The El Paso
Archeological Society, according to a note by Mrs. G. E. Moore in the 1947
Bulletin, was investigating a site on the Texas-New Mexico line.
The TAPS tradition of amateur-professional collaboration continued.
Now, the professionals were playing a more prominent role because there
were more of them than before and they were receiving more support for their
research. It was no coincidence that at this same time, in the late 1940’s,
TAPS underwent a major transformation.
The first fully post-war Bulletin, Volume 17 (1946), was an unusually
small one because of lack of material. Dr. Ray wrote an admonitory editorial
entitled "A Tailor Must Have Cloth," scolding the members for their unproductiveness. Far more important, he announced it was time for him to hand
the reins of the Society over to others.

180

Texas Archeological Society

After reviewing the history of the Society and telling how much work had
been involved in publishing the Bulletin year after year, he said:
Your president now feels that he has done enough, and that by exercise of a reasonable
care of the Society’s finances, and care in the selection of its officers, and especially its
editor, there is no likelihood that the Society will not continue to carry on under some
other person’s management as well or better than in the past.

Furthermore, he pointed out, Abilene had no educational institution with
an archeological faculty, no one other than himself doing active amateur
research, and relatively few local TAPS members who were interested
enough to attend the annual meeting that took place there. "Therefore," he
concluded,
¯ . . it is the considered recommendation of your president that the headquarters of the
Society should be removed to some large educational center where such research facilities exist, and where a permanent membership background of interested professors and
students can be created which will serve to perpetuate the Society.

He further recommended that the annual meetings not continue to be
held always in Abilene. In his function as president, he appointed Dr. W.C.
Holden to be editor of~the 1947 Bulletin. Lastly,
¯ . . your president hopes that the membership of the Society will elect someone else to
succeed him at the annual meeting to be held during the fall of 1947 at Lubbock, Texas.

This regretful announcement gracefully concealed the pain it caused Dr.
Ray to give up his child, TAPS. Ten years later when I came on the scene,
Texas archeologists were still telling how hard it had been to pry things loose
from the much respected but reluctant hands of Dr. Ray. Although in managing the Society’s affairs, he had had a great deal of help from friends and
colleagues, for nearly 20 years, he had provided the initiative; without him,
the Society probably would not have survived.
Dr. Ray created and maintained a bulletin that challenged amateurs to
write pieces good enough to deserve publication between the same covers as
papers by some of the country’s best known archeologists, to be read in
libraries of the nation’s leading research institutions. Every year, he had organized and run a meeting that was almost the sole opportunity for Texas
archeologists to come together and exchange views. He had seen the Society
through a depression and a world war. He had made the Society indispensable to the Texas scientific scene¯
But now it was growing away from him. His last Bulletin (1946) was made
up largely of articles by members of the pre-war amateur group: Clarence
Webb, Adolph Witte, Victor Smith, M.L. Crimmins, Carl Chelf. Except for
Dr. Webb, they represented the amateur archeology of the 1930’s, the kind
of archeology with which Dr. Ray was most familiar. But a new archeology
was emerging in Texas¯
Furthermore, his friends in the Society were pointing out the inappropriateness of keeping the Society in Abilene where he was now almost the only
really active member. Before the war, this would not have constituted an
adequate reason for him to relinquish command, since no one else was at
hand to take over. Now, it would be possible for the Society to have an
institutional base at Lubbock or Austin, where the schools had anthropology

programs.
¯ A number of persons felt that the proper move would be to the University
of Texas in Austin, where staff and students in archeology made up a sizeable
group that would provide a strong base for a society and its publications. But
to Cyrus Ray, these people were relative newcomers who had not played a

Davis -- 25 Yea~ofTAS

181

long and active part in the Society. The anthropology program at Texas
Technological College in Lubbock, by contrast, was under the direction of his
old friend Curry Holden, charter member of the Society, strong supporter
throughout its history, and an experienced archeologist and man of letters.
He was a man Dr. Ray could trust to take over the Bulletin.
Dr. Ray, after completing work on the 1946 Bulletin, handed over the
editorship to Dr. Holden. The Secretary-Treasurership needed to stay close
to the Bulletin. It was relinquished by Dr. Otto O. Watts (Hardin-Simmons)
who had handled the books with businesslike skill since 1932. It was taken up
by Dr. Ernest Wallace (Texas Technological College). The Society moved to
Lubbock, where the 1947 annual meeting took place, the first time it had not
been in Abilene.
Dr. Ray gave his farewell Presidential address at the Lubbock meeting.
After reviewing the good condition of the Society, he reiterated his intention
to resign as President.
The work of nineteen years is now ready to be laid on the shoulders of someone else, and
your president needs the time to complete some writing of his own. Consider carefully the
kind of man you will here choose to further carry on this important work; he should first be
interested in scholarship and research and industrious and energetic enough to do this job
without pay as well as the one he is paid to do. Do not elect a man because he is the most
"Popular." Most very popular persons are incompetent and spend all their energies seeking to please everybody. The scientist is a seeker of truth, and truthful or scientific-minded
persons are not generally popular, but usually are efficient.

But despite his protestations, Dr. Ray was elected President for one more
year, until 1948. This was surely gratifying to him. At the 1948 meeting in
Austin, his old friend Col. M.L. Crimmins was elected to succeed him, to
become the second president in the history of the Society.
In order that Dr. Ray not be shunted aside, a special title was created:
In recognition for twenty years of service as President of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, and as Editor of its first seventeen volumes of the Bulletin, and in
appreciation of the great amount of time that he has put in, and for the contributions that
he himself has made in archaeology, the Society confers upon Dr. Cyrus N. Ray the
permanent honorary title of President Emeritus.

Even though he appreciated the tributes bestowed on him, and although
he agreed to the need for change in the Society, Dr. Ray did not find the move
from center stage an easy one. By nature a man of action, he did not fit well
into an honorary status. Years later he was heard to say, "I don’t want to be
President Emeritus!" Appropriately, though, he remained for years the
honored patriarch, a force to be felt at the annual meetings.
His many duties had to be parcelled out among a number of people. Dr.
Holden was already Editor, a job at which he was being helped by Dr. Wallace. The archeological trio of Campbell, Kelley, and Krieger had taken over
the job of organizing the formal sessions at the annual meetings. The meetings
were moved to a different place each year, and like the Bulletin, took on an
increasingly (but by no means entirely) professional cast. The duties of the
President became limited to appointing committees and presiding at the annual meeting.
The new President, Col. M.L. Crimmins, was a curator at the Witte Museum. He was a charter member of the Society and one of its original Vice
Presidents. His interest in aboriginal America had resulted in a series of Bulletin articles on the archeology of Texas and Mexico. A kindly, jovial man
whose earlier military career showed in his bearing, he was a student of mill-

182

Texas Archeological Society

tary history as well as archeology. It was appropriate that an old friend of Dr.
Ray’s, a staunch supporter of the Society through its first two decades, should
be its second President.
Post-war inflation was affecting the cost of printing the Bulletin. However,
publication support from Texas Technological College made it possible to
keep Society dues at $3.00 without diminishing the size of Volume 18
(1947). This Bulletin, Dr. Holden’s first, reflected the changing course of
Texas archeology. Of its 10 papers, seven were by professionals, including
the first appearances in the Bulletin of Kelly, Campbell, Wheat, and Stephenson. From this time on, most of the papers in the Bulletin would be by professionals and the editor would be a professional.
But TAPS was not a professional society, nor was it to become one. It was
an archeological society maintaining scientific standards. The distinction is
important. It often has been noted that among persons interested in antiquities, the crucial distinction lies not between professionals and amateurs but
between archeologists and relic collectors. The key test of a person’s identification with archeology is not a matter of livelihood but of his or her concern
with context and documentation, the recognition and recording of the situations in which things are found.
In archeological societies, feelings can run high on this matter. Not a few
state and local societies have been torn by civil war between archeologists and
relic collectors. The outcome is often the collapse of the organization or the
flight of one of the factions, leaving the field to the other. The triumph of
scientific archeology is by no means assured in these battles.
TAPS was spared this sort of strife because of the scientific tradition forged
by Dr. Ray and his friends and the maintenance of it by the amateur and
professional archeologists who succeeded him. The membership appears to
have varied from dedicated archeologists to a few pot-hunters. But, the
Society’s policy was unequivocally scientific and that was the viewpoint that
always prevailed.
The professionals, who needed the Society for communication and publication, were on hand to help set standards. The membership as a whole
shared in the discovery and reporting of field evidence, administration of the
Society, and provided the financial base. For many years after Cyrus Ray
stepped down, the presidency was occupied by amateurs and professionals
without any pattern of succession. It was only much later, in the 1960’s, that
the custom developed of alternating the office between amateurs and professionals.
Col. Crimmins was succeeded by Victor J. Smith at the meeting in Alpine
in the spring of 1949 (this meeting, the only one not held in the fall, coincided
with the meeting of the Southwest Division of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science). Professor Smith is recalled by old members of
the Society with exceptional fondness: "A wonderful guy! .... A sweet man!"
Because of the Spring meeting, he has the distinction of being the only president to serve a 11/2 term, until the annual meeting in Canyon in the fall of
1950.
It was at the 1950 meeting that the pressures of inflation finally forced the
Society to raise the dues from $3.00 to $5.00. Dr. Wallace warned as early as
1948 that this move would eventually be necessary. However, lively sales of
back bulletins (Dr. Ray had left a stock of some 900 copies) staved off the final

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

183

decision until 1950. With the increase in dues, the Bulletin, which was reduced to around 130 pages in 1949 and 1950, returned to its pre-war size of
over 230 pages; the 1952 volume had 317 pages.
Judge Oi. Sims took over the presidency at the 1950 meeting. A long
time member of the Society and friend of Dr. Ray’s, he became interested in
archeology because the famous Paint Rock pictographs were on the Sims
family ranch, east of San Angelo. He made records of rock art in the Big Bend
area as early as the late 1920’s.
Judge Sims was an ebullient and witty, but also wise and thoughtful,
armchair archeologist with a stock of hilarious quips and jokes that kept every
TAPS meeting lively. Almost since joining the Society, he had served as a
Vice President, Director, or Trustee. His knowledge of Society affairs was
now applied to the presidency.
The bulletins of the early 1950’s reflected the growing scope of work in
Texas and neighboring states. Dr. Robert E. Bell, the leading archeologist at
the University of Oklahoma, was, with his colleagues, contributing reports of
field work in that state. The 1951 Bulletin carried a 94 page "Survey of
Oklahoma Archaeology," by Dr. Bell and David A. Baerreis. This was not
only the longest article ever carried by the Bulletin up to that time but was to be
the standard general reference on Oklahoma archeology for many years
thereafter.
Oklahoma was soon to form its own society and start publishing a bulletin.
Until then, the Oklahomans looked to TAPS for organizational support and
publication opportunities, as did archeologists in Arkansas and Louisiana. Dr.
Webb and his co-workers in northwestern Louisiana were contributing articles
regularly.
In North Texas, R. K. Harris was joined by Wilson W.’Crook, Jr., to form
the Crook and Harris team that was to make important contributions to the
archeology of that region. Their first report, "The Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon," defining the Carrolton and Elam foci, appeared in the 1952
Bulletin. Texas reservoir salvage reports by RBS personnel appeared in every
Bulletin, as did non-salvage reports by such workers as T. N. Campbell and
Jane Holden. There were also reports from New Mexico and Mexico and
more general reports on such topics as Paleoindian archeology.
The work of producing these bulletins was being shared not only by Curry
Holden and Ernest Wallace in Lubbock but by Alex Krieger in Austin. His
influence in the Society was increasing rapidly. Krieger, industriously soliciting and editing articles and writing reviews, was helping to make the Bulletin
an increasingly valuable source of scientific information. By 1951, he had
been a Director and a Vice President of the Society; his role in Society affairs
was to continue growing.
Krieger was a dedicated, seven day a week archeologist who was excited
about his work and assumed others would be too. Anyone interested in archeology, expert or beginner, could come to his laboratory on the top floor of
Waggener Hall and find him ready to answer questions, explain things, and
discuss problems. Furthermore, he could speak with authority. His research
and publications, in particular his monographs on North Texas and the
George C. Davis site (the latter coauthored with Perry Newell), had brought
national professional recognition to him and to Texas archeology.
The data on which his work were based came both from scientific excava-

184

Texas Archeological Society

tions and from the documented collections of amateurs who kept records of
their work. In using information supplied by amateurs, he was not discouraged by the knowledge that poorly trained excavators destroy a great
deal of information. Although saddened by the destructiveness of inexpert
digging, he was ready to listen to anyone who worked and documented
conscientiously, inexpertly or not, in order that he could use the information
that survived. Like most of his professional colleagues in Texas, Alex Krieger
realistically did not draw a sharp line between excavators with formal training
and those without~ the important consideration was the quality of the work
and the records.
With these qualities, Alex Krieger, as might be expected, began to be
prominent in Society activities once the personality of Cyrus Ray no longer
dominated Society matters. At the 1951 meeting in San Angelo (a meeting
remembered by many for a fine party on Friday evening at the ranch of Harry
Weaver, with the Weavers and Simses as hosts), he was elected to succeed
Judge Sims as President, the first full professional to hold that post. But, he
was to make even rnore important contributions to the Society.
The 1952 annual meeting was at Southern Methodist University (Dallas).
It is remembered not only because of a party at the home of King and Inus
Marie Harris and a field trip to what would later be known as the Lewisville
site, but also because of a number of historically important matters. The Society changed its name, threw its support behind the formation of a state
society in Oklahoma, and began to grow; and some new faces were appearing~
At this meeting, it was decided to drop Paleontological from the Society’s
title. Paleontological interests had always been minimal in the Society except
where they bore directly on archeological matters. Dr. Ray maintained a lively
interest in the subject in addition to his archeological interests, but in this
respect as in so many others, he was exceptional. At the Dallas meeting, it
was decided that the Society should become The Texas Archeological Society (TAS). (Apparently, however, three years passed before someone realized the change had not been made legal by a final vote making the formal
change in the Society’s constitution; the minutes of the 1955 annual meeting
record this last step). TAPS became TAS.
The new President elected at the 1952 meeting was Dr~ Robert E. Bell.
This selection was a move on the part of the Society to manifest support for
Dr. Bell and his co-workers who were starting a state society in Oklahoma. As
a further expression of support, TAS decided to have its 1953 annual meeting
at the University of Oklahoma (Norman). With this help, the Oklahoma Anthropological Society was established early in 1953 and has been an important force in the archeology of that state ever since.
Also at the 1952 meeting, Dr. Wallace reported that the size of the Society, which until then scarcely exceeded the pre-war level, had begun to
increase. The figures from 1949 to 1954 are as follows:
1949

1950

1951

1952

1953

1954

143

146

141

177

236

304

Growth took place both in Texas members and those out of state. Out of
state members were largely libraries and professionals; their memberships
reflected the growing value of the Bulletin as a source of scientific information.

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

185

But it was Texas non-professionals who made up the largest number of new
memberships.
There were doubtless a number of reasons for this increase. One was
active recruitment by Society members, a policy agreed on at the 1952 meeting in order to avoid the need to raise the dues further. A second cause was
the interest aroused around the state by the reservoir salvage work that was
taking place in so many areas. Equally important was the increased activity of
local amateur societies. Houston, Central Texas (Waco), Dallas, and El Paso
were active at the time the Society started to grow in 1952. In some cases,
their activities were inspired by RBS work in their areas~ but in general the
local societies needed no outside stimulus.
A fourth factor in the growth of the Society was the influence of certain
professionals whose enthusiasm for archeology was contagious. One of these
people was Alex Krieger, to whom everyone was a potential convert.
Another was Edward B. Jelks, a RBS archeologist who had grown up in
Valley Mills (Bosque County). His archeological training was under Campbell, Kelley, and Krieger at the University of Texas, where he earned his
Master’s Degree in 1951, and in the RBS under Stephenson, He took over
Stephenson’s responsibilities when the latter left in 1951.
Besides being a skilled archeologist and an inspired raconteur and guitar
player, Ed Jelks had the capacity of making friends, inspiring confidence, and
arousing interest in archeology. His concern with the work of amateurs led
him to write in 1951 a 10 page mimeographed Manual for Beginners in
Central Texas Archaeology. He succinctly presented the state of archeological knowledge, sources of information, and procedures for survey and excavation in Central Texas.
Appropriately, Ed Jelks was elected a Regional Vice President of the
Society very soon after becoming a member. When Alex Krieger became
Editor of the Bulletin at the end of his term as President (I 952), the SecretaryTreasurership moved to Austin along with the Bulletin. Jelks became Secretary-Treasurer. For many years after this, Austin was to be the nerve center of
the Society.
Some months before the 1952 meeting, Jelks had hired an undergraduate anthropology major, Dee Ann Suhm, to be a typist and laboratory helper
at the RBS office at the Little Campus in Austin. During the summer, when
everyone else went into the field, she typed reports and cleaned and cataIoged potsherds. Much of the material was from Jelks’ work at the Texarkana
Reservoir (now Lake Wright Patman). Periodically, Krieger would come over
from his lab and get excited about the materials coming in from the field.
All of this was Dee Ann Suhm’s very first exposure to archeology. She
found it stimulating~ so much so that when the Fall semester began, she
enrolled in T.N. Campbell’s course on the Indians of Texas, which included a
review of the archeology of the state. When the time for the TAS annual
meeting approached, Ed Jelks suggested she come along to Dallas to see
what an archeological get together was like~ she readily agreed.
Today, she is Dr. Dee Ann Suhm Story, one of Texas’ leading archeologists. Remembering that weekend in November of 1952, she recalls most
vividly the good feeling of shared concern for archeology that pervaded the
meeting; whether at the Friday night party at the Harris’~ at Saturday’s formal
papers and discussions of geology and projectile point typology~ or on the

186

Texas Archeological Society

field trip to the Elm Fork on Sunday. These were people who were working
together as friends and colleagues to gather information, give papers and
exchange ideas, and prepare publications that would increase archeological
knowledge.
She remembers being especially impressed by King Harris, a railroad
engineer who was treated with respect by the professionals; and by the most
colorful character there, Cyrus Ray, who dominated the meeting by constantly springing to his feet to make outspoken comments on the papers being
presented. It was evident to the newcomer that everyone felt admiration and
affection for Dr. Ray; but they also felt the pressure of his aggressive personality.
Not surprisingly, Dee Ann decided to join the Society. She paid her dues
and was given a bulletin. Twenty seven years later, she remembers the blue
cover of the 1952 Bulletin as it was handed to her.
She was now committed to archeology. As a term project in Campbell’s
course, and in order to learn Texas archeology, she undertook to make a
master chart summarizing the prehistoric cultural units that had been defined
in the state. The chart had a column for each region of the state and time
periods down the side. Each column showed in chronological order the
cultural complexes for that region, with a list of the diagnostic artifact categories for each cultural unit.
She was still working at the RBS for Ed Jelks. When he saw the completed
chart, he not only requested a copy for himself (Dee Ann’s roommate, Alice
Smith, who was skilled at hand lettering, prepared him a special copy), but,
also suggested that she expand it into a written statement for possible publication. It would be an outline of Texas archeology with detailed trait lists for each
cultural unit. Thus began the idea that eventually grew into the Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology. This work when it appeared almost three
years later as BTAS 25, authored by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, would be the
most notable publishing achievement of the Society.
Suhm had little time to spend on the trait lists Jelks suggested, due to
course work and part-time employment at RBS; but she was able to get the
task started during the Spring of 1953. That summer, she attended
Campbell’s archeological field school at Kincaid Shelter near Sabinal. Friday
evenings, she drove the 140 miles to Austin to spend the weekend at the
University library, digging out the necessary data from site reports to build up
the trait lists.
When the field school was over, she returned to work for Jelks at the RBS
lab and finished her undergraduate work in anthropology. Somehow, she
also found time to complete a draft of her outline of Texas archeology. By the
end of 1953, she gave it to Jelks for his comments. She entitled it "A Survey
of Texas Archeology," optimistically signifying that it was a worthy successor
to Ted Sayles’ 1935 monograph of the same name.
Jelks saw that much more could be done with the Survey; and at this
point, he became, in effect, a co-author. During early 1954, he and Suhm
reworked the manuscript. Jelks devoted much of his attention to the Central
Texas portion. His Master’s thesis, later work at Blum Rockshelter on Lake
Whitney, and work with E.O. Miller at Belton Reservoir had made him the
successor to J. Charles Kelley (who had left Texas some years before) as the
resident authority on Central Texas archeology.

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

187

He was also knowledgeable on the archeology of the Caddo area and, to
a lesser degree, on the rest of the state; and an able writer as well. With Suhm
as bibliographer and compiler and Jelks as experienced archeologist and writer, a new Survey of Texas Archeology was taking shape and would soon be
ready for submission to BTAS as a major article.
Alex Krieger was now the TAS Editor, having taken over that job from
Curry Holden at the 1952 meeting in Dallas. He published Volume 24
(1953), with site reports from Texas, Oklahoma, and Coahuila; and was
beginning to look for papers for Volume 25. But for some reason, Texas
archeologists were not writing reports in the Society’s 25th year. By Spring,
1954, when Krieger had hoped to assemble a bulletin, there was still nothing
to assemble except the Suhm-Jelks survey, then nearing completion.
It appeared that the only way a bulletin could be produced would be to
harrass additional prospective authors, much as Cyrus Ray had done for the
first volume 25 years before. That sort of effort is time consuming; Krieger’s
time was severely limited because he was completing a dissertation for the
doctoral degree at the National University of Mexico.
Although his prestige in the profession was greater than that of many
Ph.D.’s, the need to make a living at archeology had long delayed his obtaining the doctorate. It was time to get that accomplishment behind him. He
decided that he would complete work on the dissertation, which would be
finished by September. He would then get to work on the Bulletin, assuming
that additional articles would come in by then. When the Spring semester
ended in Austin, he was off to Mexico City to complete doctoral research.
Meanwhile, Suhm and Jelks continued their after hours work on the
survey. They had it essentially finished when Krieger returned from Mexico
City in September, doctoral degree in hand. Krieger found that there were still
no other articles for the 1954 Bulletin, nor any indication that anyone was
contemplating writing one.
At this juncture, a final three person inspiration came: the Suhm-Jelks
survey, further expanded with Krieger now contributing, would be the entire
Volume 25 (1954). It would be entitled An Introductory Handbook of Texas
Archeology. There was no possibility that it could be finished by the 25th
anniversary meeting of TAS at Alpine in November, or even before Spring,
1955; but it would be worth waiting for.
Completing the Handbook was not to be an easy task, because the
authors had other responsibilities. Ed Jelks was transferred out of Texas in
October (1954) when the budget trimming economies of the Eisenhower
administration forced the closing of the Austin RBS office (it was reopened in
1956). From her RBS job, Dee Ann Suhm, now pursuing her Master’s degree, moved over to become Secretary of the Department of Anthropology.
Alex Krieger had a number of commitments in addition to the Bulletin. As in
the past, much of the work on the Bulletin would have to be done after hours.
Fortunately, Suhm and Jelks had completed their survey, which, with
certain revisions, was to become Part I of the Handbook. Within each region
of the state, they had compiled the published information in terms of units of
the Midwestern Taxonomic System (Aspect, Focus, and Component). The
archeology of the whole state was presented in a uniform manner.
Each cultural unit was presented systematically according to a consistent
series of headings: general statement and history of work; known compo-

188

Texas Archeological Society

nents; types of sites; houses; earthworks (if any); livelihood; artifact categories by material (ceramics, chipped stone, etc.) and by form or type; miscellaneous traits; burial customs; relationships with other cultural units; estimated
age; and bibliographic sources. In short, the published information on all of
Texas archeology was brought together in an organized form for ready reference.

Before Jelks left, they agreed on a four stage chronological division for
each region: Paleo-American, Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic. Of
these terms, Archaic and Historic were standard in American archeology.
Paleo-American and Neo-American were coined by Jelks, the former to correspond to the more generally used Paleoindian and the latter to refer to
complexes that had any two of the three traits of agriculture, arrowpoints, and
pottery. Neo-American was thus partly equivalent to the more generally used
Formative (which applies to cultures with agriculture and pottery) but was
expanded to be more useful in the Texas area.
The task completed by Suhm and Jelks was monumental; but once
Krieger was able to devote serious attention to it, he felt that it was not complete. Cultural units had been presented, but not artifact types; the latter were
simply named as they were used in the literature. Artifact classification was
one of Krieger’s main interests; he published an article on the typological
concept in 1944 that had become one of the standard references on the
subject.
Krieger felt that the types of the two important classes of readily grouped
artifacts, pottery vessels and projectile points, should be presented according
to a uniform system just as was done with cultural units. The Handbook
needed to have a Part I, Cultural Complexes, and a Part II, Pottery and
Projectile point types.
Matters had reached this stage when the 25th anniversary meeting of TAS
took place in November (1954) at Sul Ross State College in Alpine. The 1953
meeting was at the University of Oklahoma (Norman), presided over by the
President, Dr. Robert E. Bell. At this meeting (the only Society meeting to
take place outside the state), there were both formal papers and informal
reports on archeological work in different parts of Texas. The annual election
awarded the Presidency to Curry Holden. Dr. Holden was the person to
whom Dr. Ray turned over the editorship of the Bulletin in 1947. In view of
his service, it was appropriate that he be President in the 25th anniversary
year of the Society.
At the 25th anniversary meeting in Alpine, Dr. Holden relinquished the
Presidency to Floyd Studer. He was an Amarillo businessman whose conscientious excavation and conservation of the pueblo-like ruins in the
Panhandle reached back over a period of more than 40 years. The meeting
included a fine barbecue dinner and formal session with an unusually large
number of papers by amateurs and professionals.
After the meeting, members had their choice of field trips: to the Big Bend
south of Alpine; or east to the Scharbauer site outside of Midland. The
Midland skeletal find had been made the year before and excavations conducted earlier in 1954 by Fred Wendorf, then of the Laboratory of Anthropofogy in Santa Fe.
At the business meeting, Krieger reported on plans and progress with the
Handbook, assuring the membership that it would be published in 1955 and

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

189

would be worth the delay. He and Suhm (who had become SecretaryTreasurer of the Society because of Jelks’ departure) spoke of the financial
difficulties of publishing the Bulletin in the face of rising costs.
Now began the serious work on Part II of the Handbook, the organization
of information on pottery and projectile point types. Pottery types were already, on the whole, well defined in the literature, e.g., by Campbell and
Wheat on the Gulf coast, Kelley and others in the Trans-Pecos, and Krieger
and Webb in the Caddo area. But projectile point types were another matter.
Krieger and Suhm attempted to organize point type descriptions from the
literature and from an unpublished preliminary classification by Kelley. However, standards used by different people varied so much in nature and quality
that Krieger eventually threw up his hands and decided that the only possible
course was to start back at the beginning with actual specimens. In view of the
pressure to complete the Handbook, it was an extraordinary decision because
the task was a huge one; but it was typical of the standards that Krieger
applied to research.
Using part time student help, they took some 25,000 projectile points
from the research collections, leaving about 20,000 more in reserve to be
inspected later as a check on the classification they would develop. The archeological laboratory had just been moved from Waggener Hall to Pearce
Hall on the University of Texas campus. Tables in the Pearce Hall lab were
now covered with projectile points. After hours, and on into the night, Krieger
and Suhm worked through the late winter and early Spring of 1955 on the
classification of this enormous collection, dividing it into definable types on
the basis of form and of distribution in space and time.
At first, they planned to measure the specimens and calculate means and
ranges and make up charts of distributions by site. But it quickly became
apparent that such a procedure would take several years. Krieger had to
abandon those standards. Thereafter, they worked more intuitively: does this
specimen seem to fit better in this group, or over there in that one~ does this
grouping appear to have temporal and regional coherence according to the
sites from which the specimens came? The work of classification proceeded,
often far into the night until exhaustion brought an end to the effort.
As they agreed on a type, they wrote its description and photographed
sample specimens illustrating not simply an ideal form but the range of variation within the type and the frequency with which the variations occurred.
This was Krieger’s distinctive approach to artifact typology. The same procedure was followed in presenting the pottery types. Many definitions were
already on hand, although not necessarily in the form needed for the Handbook. For every artifact type, the final presentation included illustrations, a
detailed description, cultural affiliations, geographical distribution, estimated
age, and bibliographic references.
By the time the work was done, they had prepared definitions and plates
for 78 pottery types and 81 projectile point types. For each plate, there was a
listing, specimen by specimen, of the sites from which the specimens came
(some of the pottery locations they determined from the records have since,
according to Dr. Dee Ann Suhm Story in 1979, turned out to be in error).
In the meantime, Krieger had gone through the outline Suhm and Jelks
had written on the archeology of the Caddoan area, a subject he knew inti-

190

Texas Archeological Society

mately. He modified and rewrote where necessary. He also read through and
edited the rest of the text.
As if that were not enough, he wrote a 24 page Introduction to the Handbook, discussing the concept of an archeological handbook or manual, the
theoretical and practical problems involved in artifact classification, the role of
amateurs in Texas archeology ("Progress in Texas archeology depends far
more on research by amateurs than most of them realize"), problems of ethnic
identification and dating, the history of the compilation of the Handbook, and
the basis of the terminology employed. At the back of the Handbook, they
included an 18 page glossary of archeological terms and a 16 page list of
references.
The manuscript was completed in May, 1955. It was clear that when
published, the Handbook would be more than 500 pages long (the final
publication had 562 pages, plus 20 additional pages of Society business). As
Secretary-Treasurer and Editor of TAS, Suhm and Krieger knew that the
Society’s coffers were far short of having the funds needed to publish such a
volume.
By this time, however, they were convinced that the Handbook would be
an archeological best seller. The Society would be justified in borrowing
money for the first time in its history in order to publish a thousand hard cover
copies, even though there were only slightly more than 300 members in the
Society at the time.
Krieger went into action. With the force of his convictions, his enthusiasm,
and his prestige, he convinced President Floyd Studer and the other Society
officers that the Handbook was worth the risk of going into debt. With that,
$3,500 was borrowed from the Texas State Bank in Austin. The note was cosigned by four persons who in this way testified to their loyalty to the Society
and their belief in the Handbook: Floyd V. Studer, Wilson W. Crook, Jr.,
W. C. Holden, and Alex D. Krieger. The Handbook, Volume 25 of BTAS,
was finally published in the Fall of 1955.
I was corresponding with Alex Krieger at that time. His letters conveyed
his mingled pride and anxiety about the Society’s (and his own) venture.
They had assumed a debt almost twice the amount that the Society received
in dues each year in order to publish an archeological manual unlike anything
that had appeared before.
He need not have worried! Although the price of the Handbook to nonmembers was raised to $7.50, within two years the loan was paid off and
every copy of the book was sold. Prospective customers continued to hammer at the door. The demand was such that in 1962, Part II, the Pots and
Points section, was reissued with minor revisions as Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions, edited by Suhm and Jelks. It was jointly
published by the Society and the Texas Memorial Museum. Eventually it, too,
went out of print, even in a later photocopy form. Twenty four years after its
publication, requests for the Handbook still come into the Society office. The
original hardcover edition has become a collector’s item and libraries keep
their copies (if they still have them) under lock and key.
.The effect of the Handbook on the progress of Texas archeology is part of
the history of the Society’s second quarter century. During its first 25 years,
the Society had come far. For nearly 20 of those years, Cyrus Ray supplied
the initiative and impetus behind the Society’s activities. When professional

Davis -- 25 Years of TAS

191

archeology expanded in the state after World War II, persons who wanted to
share in guiding the Society’s destinies found themselves constrained by his
forceful personality. It appears that he understood these problems; in any
case, he stepped down.
The technical activities of the Society, its publication program and the
formal side of the annual meetings, came under the direction of professionals.
For a number of years thereafter, they were to assume much of the initiative in
running the Society as a whole. But due to the traditions built in the early
years by Dr. Ray and his friends, important decisions on Society matters were
always participated in by both amateurs and professionals.
During its first quarter century, the Society played a special role in the
development of Texas archeology. It provided an essential publication outlet
for archeological information. It was the vehicle for close personal relationships among Texas archeologists, amateur and professional, through the annual meetings. As T. N. Campbell noted in personal reminiscences, the Society provided continuity to the Texas archeological effort.
In the middle 1950’s, the Society found itself nationally respected for its
Bulletin, in good financial condition (although feeling the pinch of constant
slow inflation), and growing in membership. Due to the base it had laid down
in its first quarter century, the Society was to experience stimulating new
developments in the next 25 years.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to Curry Holden, who plumbed his mind for a fine account of the early days of
the Society, transcribed and conveyed to me by Jim Word. Tom Campbell read parts of the draft
and commented in the light of his recollections. Dee Ann Story read and commented on the
entire manuscript, spending extra time and patience on the portions telling of events in which she
participated. It was not possible to interview a number of other people whose memories of early
Society events would have been helpful. I hope that this account will stimulate them to let me
know, at length, if there are additional matters that should have been included. If necessary, a
revised second edition of this history will be written.
Lauretta Corkill of the TAS office in Dallas compiled essential information from the TAPSTAS records and also put together a huge list of everyone who has ever served as an officer of th e
Society, with office and year of service. Beverly Beaty-Benadom typed the manuscript.
To all of these people, I am deeply indebted for their efforts. Much of my additional information has come from a detailed examination of all issues of the Bulletin as well as from the sources
listed in the Bibliography. Misinterpretations, other errors, and omissions are entirely my own; I
hope readers will let me know about them.
A history of the Society’s second quarter century is now under preparation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
This history is in the form of a narrative and is therefore different from most papers
that appear in the Bulletin. Breaking the text with parenthetical references was
avoided. Where articles or other items that appeared in the Bulletin were referred, the
author, volume number, or year were given. These sources are not listed in the Bibliography, but can be found in the volumes indicated. Other sources referred to by
author or year can be found accordingly in the Bibliography. In some of the latter
cases, a parenthetical note is added concerning the relevance of the source.

192

Texas Archeological Society

Barnard, Helen Donovan
1939
Early History of Research in Texas Archeology by the Department of
Anthropology, and the History of the Anthropology Museum of the University of Texas. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.

Campbell, T. N.
1947
The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 18:4075.
Cook, Harold J.
1925
Definite Evidence of Human Artifacts in the American Pleistocene.
Science, 62:459-460.
1926

The Antiquity of Man in America. Scientific American, 135:334-336.

1927

New Geological and Paleontological Evidence Bearing on the Antiquity
of Mankind in America~ Natural History, 27:240-247.

Figgins, J. D.
The Antiquity of Man in America. Natural History, 27:229-239. (Crucial
1927
data on Colorado City find.)
Harris, R. K. and Inus Marie Harris
Cyrus N. Ray: Bibliography and Contributions to Texas Archaeology.
1968
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 38:130-134.
Jelks, Edward B.
1951
Relations Between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Unpublished
master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
1953

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, 24:189-207.

1961

Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Texas. Bulletin of
the Bureau of American Ethnology, 179:1~78.

Kelley, J. Charles
1949
Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures in West
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
20:89-114~
Kidder, Alfred V.
Southwestern Archaeological Conference. Science, 66:489-491. (Ac1927
count of first Pecos Conference.)
Kirkland, Forrest and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The Rock Art of Texas Indians~ University of Texas Press, Austin.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944
The Typological Concept. American Antiquity, 9:271-288.
1946

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication, 4640:1-366.

Kroeber, A. L.
Review of Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological So1931
ciety, VoL 2, Sept., 1930. American Anthropologist, 33:228.

Davis - 25 Years of TAS

193

Miller, E. O. and Edward B. Jelks
1952
Archaeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
23:168-217.
Moorehead, Warren King
1931

Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Yale University Press, New
Haven.

Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
1949

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, 5:1-255.

Patterson, J. T.
1936
The Corner-Tang Flint Artifacts of Texas. University of Texas Bulletin,
3618:1-54.
Peabody, Charles
1909

A Reconnaissance Trip in West Texas. American Anthropologist,
11:202-216.

Pearce, J. E.
1919
Indian Mounds and Other Relics of Indian Life in Texas. American Anthropologist, 21:223-234.
1935

Tales That Dead Men Tell. University of Texas Bulletin, 3537:1-118.

Pearce, J. E. and others
1926- Texas. [Reports in annual "Archaeological Field Work" section.]
31
American Anthropologist, 28(1926):690-694; 29(1927):326-327,
335-336; 30(1928):518-519; 31 (1929):355-357; 32(1930):368-37 I’,
33(1931) :480-482.

Ray, Cyrus N.
1929
New Evidences of Ancient Man in America. Scientific American,
140:430-431.
Sayles, E. B.
1935
An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, 17:1-164.
Smith, Victor J.
1927

Some Notes on Dry Rock Shelters in Western Texas. American Anthropologist, 29:286-290.

Stephenson, Robert L.
1970

Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 41:37-276.

Studer, Floyd V.
1931
Some Field Notes and Observations Concerning Texas Panhandle
Ruins. In: W. K. Moorehead, Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley,
pp. 131-145. Yale University Press, New Haven.

1955

Texas Archeological Society. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, 28:517.

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks, eds.
1962

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication, 1:1-299.

194

Texas Archeological Society

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society, 25:1-562.
Wendorf, Fred, Alex D. Krieger, and Claude G. Albritton
1955
The Midland Discovery. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Wheat, Joe Ben
An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
1953
Bulletin of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 154:143-252.
Willey, Gordon R. and Jeremy A. Sabloff
A History of American Archaeology. W. H. Freeman and Co~, San
1974
Francisco.
Wormington, H. M.
1957

Ancient Man in North America (4th edition). Denver Museum of Natural
History Popular Series, 4:1-322. (Colorado City and other Paleoindian
finds.)

Wright, Bill
1968

Cyrus N~ Ray, 1880-1966. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
38:126-129. (Fine ch aracter sketch.)

AUTHORS
E. Mott Davis is Professor of Anthropology and Director of the Radiocarbon Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin. Trained at Harvard (B.S. 1940, M.A. 1942,
Ph.D. 1954, anthropology), he was on the anthropology staff of the University
of Nebraska, 1948-56; and at the University of Texas since 1956. Field work has
been mainly in the Great Plains, East and Central Texas, and the Balkans.
Publications include: The Jake Martin Site (with W. A. Davis; Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, 1960) ; Archeology of the Lime Creek Site
in Southwestern Nebraska (University of Nebraska State Museum, 1962);
Spadework for History (educational film series, University of Texas Radio/
Television/Film, 1964); Earth-moving Equipment at Stobi; The Application of
Archaeological Standards in Machine Excavation (with C. S. Snively, Studies
in the Antiquities of Stobi, II, Boston University, 1975). TAS service: Founder
and Editor of newsletter, 1957-70; Bulletin Editor, 1957; Archeological Director of the seventh Field School, Victoria, 1968; elected Fellow, 1968; President, 1961, 1972. Address: Department of Anthropology, University of Texas,
Austin 78712.
Ronnie Hill is a farmer and amateur archeologist. Address: Spur, Texas 79370.
Mark J. Lynott is a Supervisory Archeologist at the National Park Service, Midwest
Archeological Center in Lincoln, Nebraska. He received his B.S. from Western
Michigan University and Ph.D. from Southern Methodist University. He has
directed fieldwork in Texas and various areas of the Midwest and Great Lakes
area. Professional interests include cultural resource management and prehistoric adaptive patterns. Address: Midwest Archeological Center, Federal Building, Room 484, 100 Centennial Mall North, Lincoln, Nebraska 68508.
Wayne Parker is a farmer and amateur archeologist. Address: Ralls, Texas 79357.
Mark L. Parsons is an archeologist and amateur farmer. His research on atlatl weights
of West Texas continues. Address: Route 1, Ava, Missouri 65608.
Leland W. Patterson is a past Chairman of the Houston Archeological Society. He is
an active amateur archeologist with major interests in the upper coast and
southcentral regions of Texas. His professional duties for environmental affairs
with Tenneco Inc. include consulting on matters of contract archeology. His
research activities include site survey, lithic technology, cultural change and
cross cultural comparisons. He has published a number of articles in the Ohio
Archaeologist, Louisiana Archaeology, La Tierra, and the Houston Archeological Society Newsletter, as well as several articles on lithic technology in other
journals. Address: 418 Wycliffe, Houston, Texas 77079.
June Secrist is a Park Interpreter at San Jose Mission State Historical Site. She received
undergraduate degrees in Art and Native American Studies from Incarnate
Word College and a master’s degree from Texas Tech University in Museum
Science. Additional graduate work in photography led to an interest and exploration of anthropological photography. From 1977-1979, she was Staff
Photographer for the Lubbock Lake Project, The Museum, Texas Tech University. Address: 553 Club Dr. #4, San Antonio, Texas 78201.
Nancy Kays Smiley received a B.A. from Stanford University and a M.A. in Anthropology from the University of Texas (Austin). Her interests lie in the ceramic
technology of both the prehistoric Southwest and the Costa Rican Atlantic plain.

196

Texas Archeological Society

She is a recent employee of the Texas Archeological Survey (Austin). Address:
4402 Lancewood Way, Irvine, California 92715.
Frank A. Weir is the Director of Archaeological Services, State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation. He received his Ph.D. from Washington
State University in 1976; and has done field work in Spain, Utah, North Carolina, and Texas. He is a life member of the Texas Archeological Society and is
currently the series editor for the Highway Department Publications in Atchaeology. Address: Archaeology Section, Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Austin, Texas 78701.
Joseph B. Wilson is an Associate Professor of German at Rice University. A native of
Houston, he received his B.A. and M.A. degrees from Rice and his Ph.D. from
Stanford. He has a number of publications on Old Germanic languages and the
German spoken in the Lee-Fayette County area of Texas. He is a member of the
Texas Archeological Society, Southern Texas Archeological Society, and
Houston Archeological Society. Address: Department of German, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77001.
James H. Word is a former President of the Texas Archeological Society and is currently a member of the Board of Directors. He is an active amateur archeologist
with major interests in the Llano Estacado and lower Pecos regions of Texas. He
is author of: The Country Club Site (Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological
Society, 1963); The Montgomery Site (Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, 1965); Excavations at Baker Cave (Bulletin of the Texas Memorial
Museum, 1970); The Dunlap Complex (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, 1971); and co-author with Anne Fox of The Cogdell Burial (Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, 1975). Address: 108 W. Missouri St.,
Floydada, Texas 79235.

Information for Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the
field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the
United States and Mexico; papers on other areas are also considered. Articles concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double spaced throughout, on 81/2 x 11 white paper.
Footnotes should be avoided. References to published literature, by author, date, and
page or figure number, should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text,
with full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for examples.
Authors also should consult "Style Sheet for Authors" in Texas Archeology, 23(1):1113 (January, 1979) or write the Editor for a copy.
The proportions of full page illustrations (picture or drawing plus captions) should
be suitable for reduction to effective Bulletin page size of 41/4 x 7 inches. Plates may be
printed either horizontally or vertically; allowance for the caption to be printed in the
same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations should be listed in numerical
order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title, abstract, main body with subdivisions,
acknowledgements, references cited, appendices (if necessary), figure captions, completed photographic and drafted plates, and biographical note. Submit three copies of
the typed manuscript. Manuscripts are subject to peer review; final decision rests with
the Editor.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in Abstracts in Anthropology.
Manuscripts should be addressed to: Dr. Eileen Johnson, The Museum, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 79409.

