BULLETIN

OF

THE

Texas
Archeological
Society

VOLUME 48
Published by the Society
Austin, Texas 1977

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and
scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous
areas. The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research
on history, prehistory and archeological theory. In line with the goals of
the society, it encourages scientific collection, study and publication of
archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of
the Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1976-1977
President: W. L. FULLEN (Deer Park)
P’,~esident-elect: JAMES E. WARREN (George West)
Secretary-Treasurer: HOWARD MUHM (Dallas)
Editors: DR. HARRY J. SHAFER (College Station)
DR. THOMAS R. HESTER (San Antonio)
Newsletter Editor: MRS. F. C. STICKNEY (Midland)
Immediate Past-President: DR. S. ALAN SKINNER (Dallas)
Directors (in addition to the above]: JAMES H. WORD (Floydada),
RICHARD B. GREEN (Waco), PAUL LORRAIN (Dallas), ROY DICKINSON
(Wichita Falls), DR. JACK HUGHES (Canyon), PATRICIA M. WHEAT
(Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: MRS. ROSS SPEER (Amarillo), CLAUDE BROWN
(Lubbock), TOMMY HICKS (Dublin), ROBERT D. VERNON (Sherman), JOHN
H. HEBERT (Houston), MARY FRANCES CHADDERDON (San Antonio), JACK
KLATT (Corpus Christi), T. C. HILL, JR. (Crystal City), W. L. RICHMOND
(Austin), MRS. F. C. STICKNEY (Midland), LES DAVIS (El Paso), LORRAINE
GREENE (Monroe, La.)

Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows:
Regular’S7 50; Chartered Societies and Institutional--S10.00;
Contributing--S25.00; Life--S150.00. All members of the Society receive the
Bulletin, which is published annually and Texas Archeology, a newsletter
that is mailed out about four times a year. A monograph series Special
Publications is also published by the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to
and including Volume No 39 that are still in print may be obtained for $5.00
per Volume. Subsequent volumes are available at a cost of $7.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to
Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Southern Methodist
University, Box 161, Dallas, Texas 75275.
© Copyright by the Texas Archeological Society, 1977.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 48/1977

Harry J. Sharer, Senior Editor
Thomas R. Hester, Co-Editor

Edie Schaffer, Cover Design*

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS
1977

*Cover motif from O. T. Snodgrass {1975) Realistic Art and Times of the Mimbres
Indians; Figure 11. E1 Paso.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Late Quarternary Paleoenvironment of
Texas: A Model for the Archeologist
Vaughn M. Bryant Jr. and Harry J Sharer ..................

].

A Discussion of Possible Asiatic Influences
On Texas Pleistocene Lithic Technology
Leland W. Patterson ..............................

27

On Fluting Folsom: Notes on Recent Experiments
J. B. Sollberger .................................

47

A Lithic Reduction Sequence: A Test Case
In the North Fork Reservoir Area, Williamson
County, Texas
Patience E. Patterson ..............................

53

The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site
Eileen Johnson, Vance T. Holliday, Michael I. Kaczor
and Robert Sluckenralh ............................

83

Prehistoric Ritual Skull Burials at the Crenshaw
Site (3 MI 6), Southwest Arkansas
Mary Lucas Powell ...............................

111

Neutron Activation Analysis of West Texas
Ceramics: A Statistical Evaluation
Carolyn Ekland .................................

]. 19

NOTES
A Polychrome Vessel from Goliad County,
Southern Texas
Anne A. Fox and W. S. Fitzpatrick .......................

133

A Painted Pebble from a Site on the Nueces
River, Southern Texas
Thomas R. Hester ................................

139

Water Separation Procedures at the 1976 Texas
Archeological Society Field School: An Appraisal
of Results
John E. Keller and Bruce B. Fullem .......................

145

IN MEMORIAM
David Espy ................................
James M. Malone ...........................

151
153

BOOK REVIEWS

Archeological Investigations at Proposed Big Pine
Lake, 1974-1975, Lamar and Red River Counties,
Texas, Robert J. Mallouf
S. Alan Skinner .................................

15 5

Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School:
Analysis of Galveston Bay Area
Mortuary Practices
Clell L. Bond ...................................

159

THE AUTHORS ............................... 161

THE LATE QUATERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT
OF TEXAS: A MODEL FOR
THE ARCHEOLOGIST
VAUGHN M.

BRYANT JR. AND HARRY

J.

SHAFER

ABSTRACT
Archeological, paleontological, plant macrofossil, hydrological and
palynological evidence is used to construct a model of late Quaternary
vegetations in Texas. These available data sources suggest that: (1)
during the Wisconsin Interpluvial Period (33,500-22,500 BP) most of
Texas contained a scrub and grassland vegetation; (2) with the onset of
the Wisconsin Fullglacial Period (22,500-14,000 BP) a mosaic of
woodlands, parklands and scrublands replaced the earlier grasslands in
many regions of Texas north of Bexar County; (3) during the Lateglacial
Period (14,000-10,000 BP} there was a widespread loss of woodland
areas in Texas and a loss or major reduction of many Pleistocene fauna;
and (4) during the Postglacial Period (10,000 BP-present) the final
vegetational changes occurred leading to the establishment of our
present Texas flora and fauna. Also discussed are the possible
implications that this paleoenvironmental model has in examining the
sequences of human adaptation from the late Pleistocene to protohistoric
times in Texas.

INTRODUCTION
Archeologically and botanically the state of Texas is situated in
a critical location. Archeologically it stands at the lower end of the
Great Plains and north of the great civilizations that developed and
flourished in Mesoamerica. It is situated on the western fringe of
the Southeastern horticultural traditions and on the eastern fringe
of the Puebloan area.
We do not know when mankind first began to settle in Texas, but
there is enough available evidence to suggest that people were
occupying certain areas by at least the end of the Pleistocene era.
Evidence of this is seen in the deposits of late Pleistocene
archeological remains such as Bonfire Shelter (Dibble 1968), the
Lubbock Lake Site (Black 1974), the Levi Site (Alexander 1963), and
other similar locations in Texas where the faunal remains of
extinct Pleistocene animals are associated with the presence of
prehistoric man. Even earlier locations are claimed such as those
of Crook and Harris (1958), where radiocarbon dates have
recorded the suspected activities of ancient man to periods as
early as 38,000 years ago. In short, the archeological history of
much of Texas is already well documented to some degree and the

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

resources -- although rapidly and steadily diminishing -- are
presently numerous and varied.
On the other hand, our present knowledge of the botanical
record of Texas is not nearly as well documented. Deevey was one
of the first to recognize the critical location of Texas in reference
to possible ancient plant migrations when he suggested that during
the Quaternary period major plant migrations occurred across
portions of central and south Texas into Mexico (Deevey 1949).
Lucy Braun (1955) offered a counterview since she believed that
little or no vegetational or climatic changes occurred in Texas
during the entire Quaternary period. Later, Dillon (1956) and then
Martin and Harrell (1957) proposed still other phytographic
reconstructions suggesting moderate vegetational and climatic
changes in Texas during portions of the Quaternary period.
Zoologists such as Blair (1958) and paleontologists such as
Graham (1976), Lundelius (1967, 1974) and Slaughter (1963) have
also offered their interpretations of Quaternary vegetational
changes in Texas. Based upon the fossil evidence of extinct and
extant fauna these authors have suggested that more than 10,000
years ago certain regions of Texas were probably covered by large
wooded areas while in other regions there were savannas. Other
clues revealed by the fossil animal record suggest that there was
probably a north-south temperature gradient change which
undoubtedly affected the range and distribution of both plants and
animals.
The recovery and analysis of pack rat nests found in montane
areas of west Texas (Wells 1966; van Devender et. al. 1977) have
also provided data useful for the interpretation of late Quaternary
vegetational changes. Pack rats (Neotoma) make their nests from
objects they find in their environment. Often these items include
fruits, nuts and leaves which can later be identified and dated.
Using information recovered from pack rat nests in the Chisos
Mountains of west Texas Wells (1966) found that during the
Fullglacial Period (ca. 20,000 BP) yellow pine woodlands probably
covered large areas of the Chisos Mountains and may have
expanded outward into regions of lower elevation as well. In other
pack rat nests from the Guadalupe Mountain area van Devender,
et. al. (1973) found traces of spruce and Douglas Fir needles
suggesting that these plants formed part of the Fullglacial age
woodlands in that region.
Another approach to the study of Late Quaternary displacement,
migration and reconstruction of paleovegetations in Texas has been
the study of sequential changes in the fossil pollen record.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

3

Although these types of data are difficult to obtain, they are often
more reliable as a paleoenvironmental indicator than either the
archeological or paleontological evidence. Fossil pollen grains are
considered more useful as indicators since they can be directly
linked to the plant groups which produced them whereas man and
other animals are mobile and thus their remains can sometimes be
found outside the areas of their optimum habitats.
The earliest attempts to obtain fossil pollen data and to apply
them to problems related to the paleoenvironment of Texas were
made during the 1940’s and early 1950’s by Potzger and Tharp
(1943; 1947; 1954) after they analyzed a series of peat deposits in
east and central Texas. Their analysis of the Patsche peat bog in
Lee County revealed the presence of fossil fir, spruce, pine, maple,
basswood, birch, chestnut, walnut and alder pollen in the
lowermost deposits. Variations in the pollen composition of other
deposits from that same bog were interpreted by Potzger and
Tharp to represent a late Quaternary vegetational sequence that
began with an early cool-moist period, progressed through a warmdry period, changed to a warm-moist period and finally ended in
modern times with a warm-dry interval characterized by the
establishment of the present Post Oak Savanna vegetational zone.
Potzger and Tharp (1954) later analyzed other Texas peat deposits
in nearby Milam and Robertson Counties and determined that those
pollen records were similar to the ones they had recovered at the
Patsche Bog. Although useful, these original studies by Potzger and
Tharp did not contain any information concerning the chronological
age of any of the deposits. Even so, they still suggested that their
earliest pollen records represented the Wisconsin Fullglacial time
period and that they were approximately 20,000 years old.
No additional fossil pollen studies were conducted of Texas
deposits until the 1960’s when Graham and Heimsch (1960)
discovered and sampled the Soefje peat bog in Gonzales County
located in southcentral Texas. Graham and Heimsch also
reexamined the original peat samples which were collected in the
late 1940’s by Potzger and Tharp from the Gause Bog in Milam
County. These new studies led Graham and Heimsch to construct a
new interpretation of the central Texas Late Quaternary
Paleoenvironmental history. Their study offered a more detailed
analytical survey than those conducted by Potzger and Tharp and
led Graham and Heimsch to reject the original four-stage climatic
sequence proposed by Potzger and Tharp. Instead Graham and
Heimsch proposed that central Texas environments were cool and
moist prior to 12,500 years ago and that after that time there was

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a gradual warming trend that went through several minor
fluctuations until it ended in the warm-dry conditions found in
central Texas today.
The earliest pollen studies conducted in west Texas began in
1961, when Hafsten published a pollen analytical record of
sediments collected in a series of playa lakes located on and near
the Llano Estacado. His study was significant since it provided a
dated chronology covering a time span of more than 35,000 years
and resulted in a proposed four-stage vegetational sequence for
areas of west Texas and the Llano Estacado. His sequence
consisted of: (1) an interval more than 30,000 years ago when
grasslands were common in west Texas and on the Llano Estacado,
(2) a period between 22,500-14,000 years ago when many of the
grassland regions were replaced by conifer woodlands, (3) a
transition period between 14,000-10,000 years ago when many of
the conifer woodlands decreased in area and were being replaced
by scrub grasslands and (4) the establishment of the present
grasslands in the lower elevations of west Texas and the Llano
Estacado around 10,000 years ago.
Later,
studies by Olfield and Schoenwetter (1975) of
archeological deposits and other playa lake deposits also provided
additional information concerning suspected vegetational changes
in west Texas during the past 30,000 years. Although important,
the studies by Olfield and Schoenwetter did not significantly alter
any of the major original paleoenvironmental reconstructions
proposed by Hafsten (1961).
THE PALEOENVIRONMENTAL RECORD
Prehistoric archeological research involves, either directly, or
indirectly, the study of human artifacts. Artifacts are the products
of man’s behavioral responses that are used in an attempt to adapt
to the physical and cultural environment.
Even though artifacts constitute the basic data source most often
used by American archeologists it is essential that archeologists go
beyond this level of inquiry and examine other elements such as
the present and past environmental setting before trying to trace
the evolution of cultural systems and trying to explain the process
of cultural change. Before one tries to describe or offer hypotheses to explain cultural changes, such as the adoption of
plant and/or animal domestication or a long term hunter-gatherer
continuum, one should begin such explanatory statements with a
workable model of the paleoenvironment. This type of caution is

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

5

clearly demonstrated by Clark (1960: 308) when he emphasized his
view as to the importance of the paleoenvironment in a study of
cultural process: "... it is essential that the environment and
ecological setting of cultures ... be established as accurately as
possible, for, without this knowledge, we can hardly begin to
interpret the cultural evidence."
Unfortunately, most archeologists rarely have an opportunity to
examine the cultural systems that they are studying within the
framework of an established paleoenvironmental model. However,
when such models are available they serve as a valuable known in
the examination of cultural change and the establishment of
environmental parameters which could influence the course
human adaptive responses.

of

A paleoenvironmental model for Texas covering the last 30,000
years is offered herein as a background of data against which the
changes in the cultural responses in Texas prehistory can be
measured. Our model represents a generalized view. Although
useful in the broad sense, it is not precise enough to reflect
localized or isolated changes that may have occurred in the
microenvironment of a specific locale. Also, the weakest area of
our model is the last 2000 year segment since repeated testing has
demonstrated that in these deposits the pollen is often poorly
preserved.
There are available cultural records for Texas that hint of
significant ecological and cultural changes over much of the state
during the 13th century A.D. (Dillehay 1974) yet there is little
paleoenvironmental data from Texas to suggest what the related
ecological changes may have been. These ecological changes may
be related to significant climatic fluctuations in the American
Southwest during that time interval (Dean & Robinson 1977) yet our
paleoenvironmental data for Texas is not yet precise enough to
indicate whether or not this effect carried over into Texas.
The model that we are presenting in the remainder of this paper
is offered as a beginning point and should not be viewed by the
reader as the final analysis on this subject. Instead, it should serve
as a test for new data that becomes available in the future.
Hopefully, it will undergo modifications and refinements in the
years to follow.
Fossil pollen records from lake sediments, archeological deposits,
peat bogs, and fossil pack rat middens are the sources of data used
to propose a tentative vegetational sequence for areas of Texas
covering portions of the late Quaternary period. The majority of
these data have been collected from fossil pollen records in areas

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of central, eastcentral, west and southwest Texas. Unfortunately,
no fossil pollen records are yet available for regions of northeast,
southcentral or south Texas. This lack of pollen information from
those regions is due to several factors. First, there has only been a
limited number of attempts to recover fossil pollen from deposits in
these regions and second, what few attempts have been made have
generally resulted in a failure to find fossilized pollen.
In spite of these limitations we shall devote the remainder of this
paper to a discussion of what is presently known about the
paleoenvironmental record of Texas. We shall discuss these late
Quaternary environmental changes in Texas using the time period
chronology originally proposed by Hafsten (1961).
In our paper when we refer to a "woodland" we are interpreting it to mean an open canopy forest containing an
understory of herbaceous shrubs or grasses. Likewise, ,are view a
"parkland" as consisting of a grassland which is periodically
interrupted by isolated trees and/or large clumps of trees. Our term
"savanna" refers to a grassland containing a few scattered trees
and shrubs but still indicates an area where the continuity of the
grassland is basically uninterrupted. Finally, our term "scrub
grasslands" is used to refer to a prairie-like grassland vegetation
containing large numbers of scrubby plants and an occasional tree
or small stand of trees in the more favorable locales.
In this paper we view west Texas as containing two essentially
different physiographic and habitat zones: (I) the upland plateau
areas of the Llano Estacado and (2) the rolling hills and montane
areas of far west Texas.

Wisconsin Interpluvial Period -- 33,500-22,500
The only fossil pollen evidence yet available for the Wisconsin
Interpluvial Period in Texas comes from the studies by Hafsten
(1961) and Oldfield and Schoenwetter (1975) since deposits thus far
examined in other regions of Texas do not contain fossil pollen that
far back in time. In Hafsten’s original study of playa lake deposits
located on and near the edges of the Llano Estacado he found that
the fossil pollen evidence could be interpreted to indicate that prior
to the maximum spread of the advancing Wisconsin glaciation
(30,000 years ago) the vegetation in that region of west Texas could
be characterized as a scrub grassland with trees either totally
absent or very sparce. Furthermore, he suggested that these fossil
pollen data implied a fairly stable cool-moist climate during most of
the Wisconsin Interpluvial~Period until the beginning of the
Fullglacial Period around 22,000 years ago.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

7

Additional fossil pollen analyses of west Texas playa lake
sediments were later conducted by Oldfield and Shoenwetter
(1975). Their data led them to suggest that Hafsten’s vegetational
reconstruction for the Wisconsin Interpluvial Period was basically
correct but that it had failed to note a series of localized minor
vegetational fluctuations. Oldfield and Schoenwetter interpreted
these minor vegetational shifts to mean that during this time period
regions of the Llano Estacado may have been intermittently invaded
by areas of scattered discontinuous open parklands composed of
spruce, pine and juniper. However, their fossil pollen records, like
those of Hafsten’s, suggest that most of this region of west Texas
was probably covered by a mixed scrub and grassland prairie
vegetation during most of the Wisconsin Interpluvial Period.
Since fossil pollen records are lacking for other areas of Texas
during this same time period it is difficult to reconstruct the
precise vegetational composition for the rest of the state. On the
other hand, we would like to propose a few speculations. A fossil
pollen study of deposits in southcentral Missouri by Mehringer,
King, and Lindsay (1970), for example, revealed that that region
was dominated by an open vegetation consisting of grasses and
herbaceous plants with only a few scattered conifers around
30,000 years ago. By projecting a similar pattern for areas south of
the Ozarks we find that north and central Texas might also have
been covered by a similar scrub and grassland vegetation during
this Wisconsin Interpluvial Period. Whether or not this is an
accurate reconstruction of the central and north Texas vegetation
during this early period is unknown.
The vegetation of south and east Texas during the Wisconsin
Interpluvial Period is an even greater mystery. By extrapolating
from neighboring areas, we suspect that both south and east Texas
were composed mainly of scrubby vegetation with some areas of
grasslands present. In addition, east Texas may have represented
an ecotonal region between the proposed grasslands and scrub
areas to the west and the deciduous forests of the southeastern
United States. If so, then there were probably at least limited areas
of east Texas which remained forested throughout the entire
Wisconsin Interpluvial Period.
Wisconsin Fullglacial Period (22,500-14,000 B.P.)
As the climate grew cooler with the establishment of the
Fullglacial period, conifers and certain deciduous trees probably
began to invade the grassland regions of Texas. This assumption is

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

supported by both the pollen and faunal records of west and
central Texas.
In deposits from Rich and Arch Lake located on the Llano
Estacado Hafsten (1961} recovered a fossil pollen record showing a
steady and rapid rise in the percentages of both spruce and pine
pollen. In conjunction with this rise in conifer pollen was a
decrease in grass and herbaceous pollen. Similar pollen records
from nearby Crane Lake also reveal that by 15,000 years ago
conifer pollen completely dominated the fossil pollen rain in a large
area on and around the southern edge of the Llano Estacado. In
some cases the pine pollen accounted for over 90% of all fossil
pollen recovered in certain strata from this time period. Hafsten
interpreted this information to imply that there was a woodland
vegetation of spruce and pine covering much of the Llano Estacado
region north of the Pecos River. Hafsten also stated that he
believed most of the pines were primarily ponderosa pine and that
although spruce trees were also present, they were probably not
very abundant. In addition, Hafsten suggested that fir (Abies} trees
were probably not part of the Wisconsin Fullglacial Period
vegetation on any part of the Llano Estacado in Texas.
Oldfield and Schoenwetter (1975} examined other playa lake
deposits on the Llano Estacado and concluded that the Fullglacial
vegetation in most of west Texas (including the Llano Estacado}
probably consisted of a continuous coniferous forest composed
primarily of a mixture of ponderosa pines and spruce (either Picea
engelmannii or Picea punguns}. They also stated that they believed
the conifer forests of that time period contained approximately
40% pine trees and 60% spruce trees in the areas of higher
elevation while in the lower elevations the mixture of conifers
was about 75% pine and 25% spruce. Furthermore, like Hafsten,
they agreed that the true fir {Abies} was probably not present in
any area of west Texas during the Fullglacial Period.
It was originally believed that high conifer pollen counts, similar
to the ones discovered in ,zest Texas Fullglacial deposits, were
reliable indicators of a widespread woodland type vegetation. More
recently, this interpretation has been questioned by Martin (1964}
and Martin and Mehringer (1965} who suggest that these
Fullglacial pollen records may reflect widespread conifer
parklands rather than woodlands.
In an extensive study of the modern pollen rain in grassland and
conifer woodland areas of eastern Washington and western Idaho
Mack and Bryant (1974} noted that percentages of pine pollen as
high as 50% could be recovered in grassland areas approximately

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

9

30 miles from the nearest forest. In general, however, the average
percentage of pine pollen for most of the grassland areas, near
forested regions was only 3040%. In other studies of the modern
pollen rain in the Pacific Northwest Mack and Bryant (1978) found
that percentages of pine pollen could reach as high as 80% in
surface samples collected in conifer parklands composed primarily
of pines and grasses. They also noted that percentages of pine
pollen could reach as high as 70% in surface samples collected in
scrub grasslands where only a few isolated pine trees were
present. It should be pointed out, however, that Mack and Bryant
(1974, 1978) were examining the modern pollen rain in and around
the Columbia Basin region of Washington state which is surrounded by extensive conifer forests composed of pines, spruce,
Douglas fir and fir. Thus, long distance transport of conifer pollen
undoubtedly helped to elevate the percentages of these pollen types
in the nearby grassland and parkland regions of the Columbia
Basin. This phenomenon is easier to understand in light of some of
their other data (Mack and Bryant 1974) which show that in locales
more than 30 miles away from heavily forested areas the
percentages of pine pollen in grassland areas begin to drop below
the 30-40% mark recovered in locales closer to the forested
regions. However, conifer parkland locales were able to maintain
percentages of pine pollen as high as 70% even in areas located
more than 30 miles away from heavily forested regions.
Using the above information as a possible collary for the west
Texas Fullglacial pollen records, we would like to suggest a
modification to the interpretation proposed by Hafsten (1961) and
Oldfield and Schoenwetter (1975). The high percentages of fossil
pine pollen may, as Hafsten has suggested, represent a continuous
conifer woodland covering much of west Texas including the Llano
Estacado. On the other hand, we believe that the same pollen data
could instead be interpreted to represent a Fullglacial period
vegetation characterized by some large areas of conifer forests
(primarily confined to elevated regions in west Texas) mixed with
parklands and even some large areas of grasslands and scrub
grasslands on the Llano Estacado.
Fossil pollen records from Bonfire Shelter located in the Amistad
Reservoir area of southwest Texas also can be used to help
interpret the Fullglacial period vegetational record. Although no
radiocarbon dates are yet available from the lowermost pollen
bearing strata in Bonfire Shelter, we believe that those deposits
(which are composed entirely of thick limestone spalls) were
produced primarily by severe ice wedging that loosened spalls from

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the roof and walls of the shelter during the cold winters of the late
Fullglacial period. Very high percentages (over 80%) of mostly
haploxylon type (pinyon) pine pollen was recovered from these spall
zone deposits and suggests that during the late Fullglacial period
southwest Texas was probably covered by a mosiac of woodland,
parkland and scrub grassland vegetations composed primarily of
grasses, pinyon pines and perhaps some junipers. We believe that
junipers were a component of the southwest Texas Fullglacial
period vegetation even though its pollen was not recovered at
Bonfire Shelter. Juniper pollen, like the pollen of certain other
conifers such as Douglas fir, is fragile and does not preserve well
in akaline sediments similar to the ones found in Bonfire Shelter.
Therefore, the absence of juniper pollen in the fossil record of this
period does not necessarily mean that juniper trees were not fact
presence.
We suspect that the proposed ponderosa pine and spruce
woodlands of the higher elevations in west Texas did not invade
the Amistad region but were instead confined to areas north and
west of the region. In addition, the fossil pollen record from Bonfire
Shelter also suggests that spruce trees were not present in the
Amistad region during any portion of the Fullglacial Period.
As mentioned earlier, van Devender et el. (1978) recovered
macrofossil traces of spruce and Douglas fir (--seudotsuga) in pack
rat nests from the Guadalupe Mountains in deposits dating from
the late Fullglacial period. The presence of Douglas fir macrofossil
remains in pack rat nests of this time period and the corresponding
absence of its pollen grains in Fullglacial age deposits from all
areas of west Texas is not unexpected. Douglas fir trees produce
relatively low quantities of pollen and its pollen is often poorly
represented in areas where its trees are found in association with
heaw pollen producers such as spruce and pines (Baker 1976); this
also seems to be true even when Douglas fir is dominant.
Therefore, we suspect that Douglas fir trees were probably present
in most areas of west Texas (including the Llano Estacado) during
the Fullglacial yet it is difficult to estimate how abundant they may
have been.
Fossil pollen records from deposits in central Texas suggest that
the invastion of Fullglacial forest elements into Texas was not
restricted to regions of west Texas. Fullglacial age deposits
recovered from Boriack Bog located in Lee County, Texas, reveal a
record of spruce, poplar, birch, hazelnut, ash, maple, alder,
dogwood, hickory, basswood, oak, and pine in deposits
radiocarbon dated as older than 15,500 years ago (Bryant 1977a).

TEXAS LATEQUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

11

This suggests that at least a portion of the central Texas late
Fullglacial vegetation was composed of deciduous woodlands with
some conifers present.
Today central Texas is not represented by either a uniform soil
or vegetation composition (Gould 1975) and we suspect that some of
these same differences may well have existed as far back as the
late Fullglacial period. Fossil pollen data are lacking for the
Edwards Plateau region of central Texas west of Austin which
today represents an area of grasslands mixed with junipers, oaks
and mesquite. The eastern part of central Texas is today
represented by blackland prairies and post oak savannas yet fossil
pollen data are available and suggest that it was more heavily
forested than at present.
In Lee County at the Boriack Bog location, for example,
Fullglacial age peat deposits are dominated by high percentages of
alder pollen (Bryant 1977a). Alder plants can either be shrub
species or tree species yet their pollen look essentially identical.
Therefore, it is possible that the alder pollen found in Boriack Bog
could have come from either alder trees or from the shrub species
of this plant. Furthermore, since alder tends to produce great
quantities of airborne pollen, its pollen is often over represented in
any fossil record (Janssen 1966).
Other tree pollen types such as basswood, maple, poplar, and
spruce pollen are also present but are not as well represented in
the fossil record of Fullglacial age deposits in Boriack Bog. This
may in part be the result of under representation of their pollen in
the fossil record. Unlike alder, these plants produce either low
quantities of pollen or their pollen grains are fragile and thus easily destroyed by microorganisms and other similar mechanism of
destruction before they can become preserved and later recovered
for analysis. We suspect that each of these plant types was probably an important component in the regional vegetation of the
eastern portion of central Texas during the Fullglacial period even
though these plants are weakly represented in the fossil pollen
record.
The pine and oak pollen percentages in these early deposits from
Boriack Bog range from a low of 4% to a maximum of 15% yet in
actuality these plants may have been only weakly represented in
the vegetation in that time period. Like alder, both of these plants
produce great quantities of airborne pollen which is easily
dispersed and is capable of traveling great distances. In fact,
recent pollen studies (Bryant 1977a) demonstrated that most (if not
all) of the fossil pine pollen in Boriack Bog probably came from

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

large stands of loblolly pines located 30 miles southwest of the bog
near Bastrop. We have found no evidence to suggest that large
groups of pines were growing any nearer to Boriack Bog during the
Fullglacial period than they are today.
Implications concerning the paleoenvironmental record of the
Fullglacial period can also be based upon the presence or absence
of certain animals which are known to prefer specific types of
plant habitats. Plaeontological evidence is most useful when an
entire faunal assembledge is present and can be used to speculate
on the potential vegetational and climatic extremes that may have
been present. Often this is not possible and instead limited
interpretations must be cautiously reported and must be based
upon the isolated presence of a single faunal type. Slaughter (1963),
for example, has found the faunal remains of the giant beaver
(Castoroides) in northeast Texas Fullglacial deposits suggesting that
that region could have been forested and may have had a cool or
cold climate. Further south at Friesenhahn Cave Graham (1976)
recovered the remains of the forest dwelling long-nosed peccary
(Mylohyus), the mastodon (Mammut) -- which although not
restricted to a forest habitat preferred those areas when they were
available (Martin and Guilday, 1967) -- and the tapir (Tapirus)
which is usually associated with humid forest environments. All of
those fauna were found in deposits dating from the Fullglacial
period and which also contained a pollen record (Hall, personal
communications) suggesting a mosiac of prairie grasslands mixed
with woodland and parkland areas. Lundelius (1967, 1974) has
shown that a number of animal species such as the masked shrew
(Sorex cinereus) and the bog lemming (Synaptomys cooperi) lived in
areas of north and central Texas up through the early part of the
Postglacial period before they disappeared from Texas. Both of
these animals currently live in more northern areas of North
America and are today found in cool, wet habitats. Their earlier
presence, and their current absence, in Texas infers earlier
climatic conditions similar to those reflected by the fossil pollen
record of Boriack Bog.
Geological and hydrological studies of sediments on the Llano
Estacado by Reeves (1963) can also be used to infer cool and humid
conditions for the Fullglacial period in west Texas. Reeves has
interpreted his data to suggest that during the Fullglacial period
midsummer temperature averages were at least 9°F cooler than at
present and were accompanied by an annual precipitation rate of
approximately 33-34 inches with a maximum annual evaporation
rate no higher than 44 inches per year (this compares with present

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

13

rates of 12-20 inches of annual rainfall and an annual evaporation
rate of 60 inches). He feels that it would require at least these
estimated rates to maintain the west Texas playa lake basins at
their known Fullglacial age levels.
In summary, it appears that most of east, central, north and west
Texas was considerably cooler and more humid than today and
was covered by areas of grasslands, woodlands and parklands
during most of the Fullglacial Period. Few data are available for
south Texas during the Fullglacial Period but the pollen records
from Friesenhahn Cave do contain higher percentages of grass
pollen than pollen records of similar age deposits in central,
southwest and west Texas. Based upon that information we would
conclude that from Bexar County south, the Fullglacial period
vegetation was probably composed of larger areas of grass and
scrublands and fewer areas of parklands or woodlands.

Lateglacial Period -- 14,000-10,000
The Lateglacial period in Texas represents a time when most of
the woodland and parklands regions of Texas began to disappear
leaving behind only isolated remnants of earlier widespread areas.
This suspected vegetational shift during the Lateglacial period is
seen in the fossil pollen records of the Llano Estacado and other
regions of west Texas (Hafsten 1961; Oldfield and Schoenwetter
1975) which show a rapid decline in the percentages of pine pollen
and the almost total loss of spruce pollen by 10,000 years ago. The
Lateglacial age replacement of the west Texas mixed conifer
woodlands and parklands by large regions of scrub grasslands is
reflected in the fossil record by marked declines of pine and spruce
pollen accompanied by sharp rises in grass and herb pollen during
the entire duration of the Lateglacial period.
Fossil pollen records recovered from the Amistad Region also
reflect a widespread loss of the pinyon woodland areas during the
Lateglacial period. Lateglacial deposits at Bonfire Shelter contain a
fossil pollen record suggesting that some pinyon trees were still
present in the region but that they were probably becoming more
restricted to isolated parkland areas that were shrinking in size
and being replaced by an expansion of grass and shrub areas. This
proposed shift in the vegetational composition of the lower Pecos
River area during the Lateglacial period may have resulted from a
variety of factors including a suspected reduction in the
availability of groundwater moisture combined with increasing
evaporation rates caused by elevated summer temperatures.

14

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Central Texas also experienced vegetational changes during the
Lateglacial period even though at first these vegetational changes
were probably subtle. Lateglacial sediments the Boriack and Gause
peat bogs of central Texas (Bryant 1977a} contain a fossil pollen
record indicating a gradual reduction in the forest cover of the
area, and by inference, a gradual degeneration of the climate. The
fossil pollen records indicate that by the end of the Lateglacial
period in central Texas many of the dominant plants that once
lived in the region were now gone. These plants included taxa such
as the willow, birch, spruce, basswood, alder, tupelo and ash. In
addition, the percentages of pollen from other tree genera such as
the oaks were also slightly reduced. If fossil pollen records were
also available for regions of north, east and south Texas we
suspect that they would also indicate similar trends in vegetational
change during the Lateglacial period.
In general the available pollen evidence suggests that throughout
the Lateglacial period most regions of Texas were undoubtedly
getting warmer and drier. This assumption is supported by the
widespread loss of woodland areas and reduction in parkland
regions throughout the areas of Texas where they had thrived
during the previous Fullglacial period.
The fossil fauna records of Lateglacial Period deposits in Texas
reveal the loss of many animals suggesting that their vegetational
habitats and the accompanying climates were changing rapidly.
Graham (1976} states that, "the most significant changes in the
faunal history of central Texas occurred between Groups I and II".
His "Group I" refers to the faunal record up through the
Lateglacial Period and the significant changes that he refers to are
the sequential disappearances of animals found today only in areas
of North America where climates are considerably cooler and more
moist than the present climates of central Texas. Graham’s list of
animals in Group I that disappeared during this period include the
masked shrew (Sorex cinereus), the ermine {Mustela erminea}, the
meadow vole {Microtus pennsylvanicus}, the long-tailed shrew
{Sorex vagrans}, and the hare {Lepus townsendii}. Similar losses of
these and other Pleistocene fauna were also noted for the
Lateglacial Period from regions of north and west Texas (Lundelius
1967, 1974). In deposits at the Lubbock Lake Site (located on the
Llano Estacado} Johnson {1974) found that by the end of the
Lateglacial period the regional vegetation of that area would have
had to contain large open grassland regions in order to support the
known fauna that were living there. Missing from those terminal
Lateglacial deposits at Lubbock Lake were woodland vertebrates

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

15

whose remains had been found associated with earlier Lateglacial
deposits but which disappeared before 10,000 years ago. The
invertebrate faunal remains at the Lubbock Lake Site (Johnson,
1974) also imply a similar vegetational and climatic trend towards
drier and warmer conditions throughout the Lateglacial period.
Postglacial Period -- 10,000 Years Ago To The Present
The onset of the Postglacial period in Texas was not
accompanied by any sudden or radical changes in the regional
vegetation (Bryant 1969, 1977a; Hafsten 1961; Oldfield and
Schoenwetter 1975). In the southwest Texas area the inferred
mosiac vegetation of woodlands, parklands and scrub grasslands of
the previous Lateglacial Period were now being gradually replaced
by larger areas of scrub grasslands between 10,000-7,000 years
ago. This interpretation is based upon the fossil pollen record at
Bonfire Shelter (Bryant 1969) and Hinds Cave (Bryant 1977b) which
show gradual reductions in the percentages of fossil pollen from
’ trees such as the pinyon pine. Sufficient fossil pinyon pine was
recovered from the deposits in this 3,000 year interval to suggest
that there were still some limited areas (perhaps in protected
canyons and in some upland locales) where pinyons still flourished
in the Amistad region.
Preliminary analysis of plant remains recovered from Hinds Cave
and Baker Cave in the Amistad region (Dering 1977) demonstrates
that by 8,500 BP local aboriginal groups were already exploiting
plants such as agave, yucca, sotol and cactus which are generally
associated with fairly xeric environments. Furthermore, Dering has
not yet recovered any plant macrofossil remains of pinyon nuts in
those deposits which further suggests that perhaps the pinyons had
already retreated beyond the limits of the aboriginal’s food
gathering range at these sites by 8,500 BP. An alternate hypothesis
would be that for some reason the prehistoric peoples of the
Amistad region did not collect or use pinyon nuts even though they
were available. This alternate hypothesis is possible yet we feel it
is highly unlikely that these early groups would have ignored such
a valuable food source had it been available for exploitation
(Shafer and Bryant 1977).
There are only limited fossil pollen records available from areas
of southwest Texas during the next 3000 year interval from 7,0004,000 BP. The fossil pollen record from Centipede Cave (Johnson
1963) is incomplete and based largely upon inadequate pollen
counts of less than 200 grains per sample. In spite of these
shortcomings, it must at least be considered since it represents one

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the few fossil pollen sequences yet available for any portion of
this 3,000 year time interval. During his analysis of these deposits
Johnson {1963} noted that there did not appear to be any dramatic
changes in either the vegetational composition or climate in the
Amistad area but that his data did suggest a progressive degeneration of the previous mesic vegetation, and by inference, an elevation of moisture evaporation rates and/or reduction in rainfall.
Johnson also noted the apparent increase in agave pollen around
the end of this 3000 year period.
Recent pollen studies of deposits in Hinds Cave (Bryant 1977b)
have produced a fossil pollen record covering a time span from
approximately 9000-3000 BP. The main characteristics of the
Hinds Cave pollen record from this time period are: (1} high
percentages of grass and herb pollen, (2} low percentages of pine
and other tree pollen and (3} significant amounts of economic pollen
from plants such as sotol and agave. Since this preliminary
analysis from Hinds Cave is based upon only eight of the more than
60 pollen samples scheduled for analysis from that site we hesitate
to place too much emphasis upon their represented data since
much of it could represent an artifact created by the activities of
man rather than a true picture of the regional paleoenvironment.
Hopefully, the analysis of additional samples from this site will help
clarify the true meaning of this first series of pollen samples. The
important feature of this information is that we now have the
prospect of obtaining an excellent series of pollen samples in the
lower Pecos area of Texas from a time period which up until now
has yielded only a very few sediment samples which contained any
fossil pollen at all.
Until more paleoenvironmental data can be utilized from the
fossil pollen record for the time span between 7000-4000 BP must
rely upon what other evidence already exists. This other evidence
consists primarily of data which suggest that areas of southwest
Texas along the Rio Grande and lower Pecos Rivers were
subjected to intervals of severe flooding during much of this 3000
year period {Patton 1977}. These periods of erosion and flooding
are clearly marked in the alluvial terraces and sediments of
archeological sites in this region such as the Devil’s Mouth Site
{Johnson 1964} located on the Rio Grande and Arenosa Shelter
(Dibble 1967} located on the Pecos River. Of the 22 major floods
identified by Patton (1977} in the deposits at Arenosa Shelter dating
from 4,500 B.P. to the present almost one half of them (ten}
occurred between 3,200-4,500 BP.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

17

The causes of erosion and flooding during this 1,300 year period
are not fully understood. One possible explanation is that perhaps
minor rises in summer temperatures or short periods of drought
may have led to partial removal of the upland vegetation thereby
allowing increased rainfall runoff and increases in river discharge.
Another possible explanation could be increased precipitation
during the later portion of this period as suggested by Haynes
(1968). This possible increase in annual precipitation may have
been caused by a series of active frontal systems moving further
inland than usual. Although no actual climatological evidence
exists for this type of frontal system phenomenon in the past, these
storm systems do move through the area today and can release
great amounts of moisture in a short period of time. In the summer
of 1975, for example, we were in the lower Pecos River region
when such a frontal system released over five inches of rainfall in
less than eight hours. The resulting runoff filled many streams that
were normally dry and it also caused some major erosional activity
along the alluvial banks of the lower Pecos River.
Still another possibility for the widespread alluvial erosion
between 3,200-4,500 BP could have come from short periods of
intense rainfall associated with the aftermath of a hurricane that
may have moved unusually far inland from either the Pacific or
Gulf Coast areas. A recent example of that phenomenon occurred
in 1954 when Hurricane Alice moved inland over the Rio Grande
Valley and the resulting rainfall almost completely filled the Falcon
Reservoir on the Rio Grande in the span of a few days. Based upon
available records Patton (1977) calculated that at the height of that
flood Arenosa Shelter on the Pecos River was more than 30 feet
under water and that the Pecos River reached a peak depth of over
80 feet. Since a person can easily wade across the Pecos River
during low water periods this estimate has increased significance.
The last 4000 years of the Postglacial Period in southwest Texas
is represented by fossil pollen types indicating a gradual and
continual trend towards increased aridity. Only once around 2,500
years ago was this apparent trend interrupted. At Bonfire Shelter
and the Devil’s Mouth Site, fossil pollen records dating from around
2,500 years ago show marked increases in the percentages of both
pine and grass pollen suggesting a brief return of somewhat cooler
and more mesic conditions (Bryant 1969). This apparent mesic
interval, however, was short-lived and soon the trend toward
increased aridity was resumed and has continued in southwest
Texas until the present.

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The analysis of fossil pollen from playa lakes (Hafsten 1961;
Oldfield and Schoenwetter 1975} reveal a Postglacial trend towards
increased aridity and the establishment of large dry grassland
areas lacking trees except along major drainages and in areas of
higher elevation in areas of west Texas, including regions of the
Llano Estacado. Hafsten’s fossil pollen records from the several
playa lakes on the Llano Estacado also show an apparent mesic
interval occurring around 2,500 years ago. Like the fossil pollen
records of the Amistad Region in southwest Texas, the playa lake
fossil pollen records show that this brief interval was
characterized by higher percentages of both grass and pine pollen
but that it too was short-lived. Soon after it ended, the warming
and drying trend in both southwest and west Texas continued until
the present.
Peat deposits in central Texas also reveal a fossil pollen record
suggesting a continual trend towards drier and warmer conditions
following the end of the Lateglacial period {Bryant 1977a).
Sediments from a number of peat bog locations in central Texas, all
dated as being younger than 10,000 years, show declines in most
tree pollen types (with the exception of oak) and significant
increases in herb and especially grass pollen during the last 10,000
years.
The gradual, yet continual, loss of most tree pollen and the
corresponding rise in grass and herb pollen during the Postglacial
period in central Texas suggests that east of the Edwards Plateau
the Fullglacial mixed deciduous woodlands that were first reduced
to parklands during the Lateglacial period were finally reduced to
the present savanna type vegetation during the Postglacial period.
The fossil pollen records from central Texas bog deposits
covering the time span of the Altithermal Period (7,000-4,500 B.P.)
as defined by Antevs (1955), suggest a continual trend towards less
mesic conditions. During this nearly 3,000 year period there are no
indications in the fossil pollen records that the climate in central
Texas was either significantly warmer, wetter, drier or cooler than
either the interval before or after that period. What is instead
revealed is a fossil record showing a gradual, yet continual, trend
towards a more xeric vegetation and, by inference, a warmer and
drier climate. The fossil pollen record also implies that the present
widespread area of post oak savanna vegetation in central Texas
(Gould 1975) was probably more or less established in its present
form and distribution by 3,000 years ago.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

19

USING THE PALEOENVIRONMENTAL MODEL
FOR INTERPRETING TEXAS PREHISTORY
Our presentation suggesting that there have been major
environmental changes in Texas during the last 30,000 years
should come as no new revelation to prehistorians despite the fact
that many seem to currently work in ignorance of the aboriginals’
environmental conditions. We feel that it is essential to construct a
workable framework of the paleoenvironment prior to Anglo
settlement and land utilization in any area under archeological
study. In that way the archeologist can approach his data with a
confident understanding of the biological and natural resources
that may have been available to the aborigines. After all, it was the
distribution of these natural resources together with the aboriginal
technology that constituted the major determinant factors in the
evolution, settlement and resource utilization patterns.
We suggest that the paleoenvironmental model offered above
should serve as a background for more specific regional studies
(such as the one we are currently conducting in the lower Pecos
region). More importantly, the model can serve as a known variable
in exploring the processes of culture change as they are recognized
through the study of Texas prehistory. For example, there are two
common errors that are often made by Texas archeologists in
regard to paleoenvironmental changes. The first concerns the
environmental changes that occurred at the end of the Pleistocene
and the second concerns the Big Game Hunting tradition in Texas.
It is often assumed by archeologists that the environmental
changes at the end of the Pleistocene were both sudden and
uniform throughout the state; that is, about 10,000 years ago the
ice age (and Paleo-Indian Stage) was over, the big game was gone
and a new lifeway, the Archaic, evolved. We have already tried to
demonstrate that the environmental changes that occurred during
the Lateglacial and early Postglacial periods were not uniform and
that each region was probably affected differently. Furthermore,
our records indicate that the changes were demonstrably gradual,
occurred over several thousand years and probably went
completely unnoticed by successive generations of aborigines.
These changes, however, were nonetheless manifested over time
and eventually created concomitant changes in the human adaptive
systems.
Knowledge of a gradual, regionally specific environmental
change has important implications on the second commonly
expressed assumption that a rather uniform big game hunting

20

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

tradition [symbolized in the term Paleo-Indian), existed throughout
Texas. The lingering influence of Krieger’s (1964) Stage concept as
it was used in the Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks 1954) is undoubtedly largely responsible for the present
day expression of this view. If one considers the paleoenvironment,
animal behavior and habitat it is easily conceivable that the socalled Paleo-Indian or big game hunting concept may only have been
applicable to the Plains and peripheral Plains environments of
Texas -- if even there! We seriously doubt that big game hunting
would have been economically sound as a major subsistence
pattern in any of the parkland and woodland areas of eastern
Texas where the species of big game were probably dispersed or
not present in large numbers. Indeed, to our knowledge, there is no
confirmed association of artifacts of late Pleistocene age associated
with the remains of big game faunal remains in any of Texas
outside the Plains and its associated environments. Therefore, the
obvious implication of these data is that hunting and gathering
[Archaic) adaptations, in all probability, represented the initial and
the continuous prehistoric adaptive patterns in large areas of
Texas.
Part of the interpretive problem regarding the Paleo-Indian vs.
the Archaic issue is that archeologists sometimes are too often
blinded by some certain overworked assumptions such as projectile
point form. Lanceolate points are usually regarded as Paleo-Indian
forms, while stemmed points are often attributed to the Archaic
subsistance pattern. At present we know too little about form,
function and context of use to rely with any degree of certainty
upon this assumption any longer. That lanceolate shaped points are
indicative of antiquity is demonstrable but as Shafer (1975) has
pointed out, shape alone does not adequately indicate what was
actually being hunted.
Our work at Hinds Cave in the lower Pecos area is offered as an
example of how the paleoenvironmental model can be used by the
archeologist on a regional basis. The majority of the earlier
archeological research in the lower Pecos region emphasized
chronology building and identifying stylistic changes through time
[Alexander’s [1974] work at Conejo Shelter represents one of the
very few exceptions) whereas from the beginning our work at
Hinds Cave was an interdisciplinary archeological and botanical
project aimed at an intensive investigation of the paleoecology and
adaptive patterns utilized by the site’s occupants. The occupation
sequence at Hinds Cave covers approximately 9000 years of
prehistory, making it an excellent site for examining the

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

21

relationship between the
cultural
adaptive
changes
and
paleoenvironmental change that occurred through time. The
preliminary report of our findings (Shafer and Bryant 1977) is
tentative since the research is still in progress. However, even at
this stage we are finding exciting results such as the ones related
to the paleoenvironmental study that indicate a gradual dessication
of the area by an encroachment of Chihuahuan desert plants by at
least 8,500 years ago. Another aspect we are finding indicates that
chronological changes, {i.e. projectile point period markers)
evidently had little bearing on either the basic subsistence pattern
or the prehistoric economic patterns. And finally, even at this point
we feel confident in saying that at Hinds Cave there was probably
a long continuum with little significant changes in the overall
exploitative system during the past 9000 years.

SUMMARY
The paleoenvironmental model presented in this article has very
broad implications useful for the interpretation of Texas prehistory
since it provides an opportunity for archeologists to view culture
histories in a broader context beyond what is generally offered by
artifacts alone. In compiling these data we have attempted to
examine both published and unpublished works relating to fossil
pollen analyses, paleontological studies, hydrological reports,
enthnobotanical studies still in progress and archeological records.
From these data we have discovered that for the most part little is
really known about the past 30,000 year record of environmental
change in Texas. Some information does exist but when available it
is generally fragmentary or relates only to a small region of Texas.
Hopefully, as research in this area continues we will someday have
a more nearly precise image of what really happened
environmentally in Texas and how our current interpretations for
the past 30,000 year period will be affected.
We also offer this model as a basis for explaining culture change
as it is observed in the archeological record. Archeological sites
contain the behavioral products of man’s attempt to cope with the
environment. Since this is such a critical aspect of archeological
reports we present reasons why we feel an understanding of the
paleoenvironment is so essential in archeology.

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Drs. Ernest Lundelius, Eileen Johnson and
Thomas R. Hester for their review of this manuscript and the helpful
suggestions they offered. Special thanks is also given to Glenna
Williams-Dean and Phil Dering of the Texas A&M Anthropology
Research Laboratory for their assistance related to current research
still in progress in southwest Texas. Funding for a portion of this
research was derived from National Science Foundation grant
BNS76-10293.

REFERENCES CITED

Antevs, Ernst
1955 Geologic -- Climatic Dating in the West. American Antiquity, Voh
20, No. 4, pp. 317-335.
Alexander, Herbert L.
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-lndian Campsite In Central Texas. American
Antiquity, Voh 28, No. 4, pp. 510-527.
Alexander, Robert K.
1974 The Archeology of Conejo Shelter: A Study of Cultural Stability at
an Archaic Rockshelter Site in Southwestern Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Baker, Richard G.
1976 Late Quaternary Vegetation History of the Yellowstone Lake Basin,
Wyoming. U.S. Geological Survey Paper No. 729 E., U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Black, Craig C.
1974 History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum
lournal, Voh XV. Texas Tech University. Lubbock, Texas.
Blair, W. Frank
1958 Distribution Pattern of Vertebrates in the Southern States in
Relation to Past and Present Environments. Zoogeography,
American Association For the Advancement of Science, pp. 433468.
Braun, E. Lucy
1955 The Phytogeography of Unglaciated Eastern United States and its
Interpretation. Botanical Review, Vol. 21, pp. 297-375.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr.
1969 Late
Fultglacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis
of Texas
Sediments. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
1977a A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational Change in Central
Texas. Palynology, Vol. 1, pp. 143-156.
1977b Preliminary Pollen Analysis from Hinds Cave. In: Archeological and
Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Research Laboratory Special Series
No. 1, pp. 70-77.
Clark, D.
1960 Human Ecology during the Africa South of the Sahara. Current
Anthropology Vol. 1, pp. 307-324.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

23

Crook, W. W. and R. K. Harris
1958A Pleistocene Camp Site near Lewisville, Texas. American
Antiquity, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 233-246.
Dean, Jeffrey S. and W. J. Robinson
1977 Dendroclimatic Variability in the American Southwest from A.D.
680-1970. (Final report to the National Park Service). Laboratory of
Tree-Ring Research Publication. Tucson, Arizona.
Deevey, E. S.
1949Biogeography of the Pleistocene. Geological Society America
Bulletin, Vol. 60, pp. 1315-1416.
Dering, J. Phil
1977 Plant Macrofossil Study: A Progress Report. In: Archeological and
Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Research Laboratory Special Series
No. 1, pp. 84-102.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist Vol. 19, No. 65; pp. 180-196.
Dillon, L. S.
1956 Wisconsin Climate and Life Zones in North America. Science, Vol.
123, pp. 167-176.
Dibble, David S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-1966. Report Submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, Austin, Texas.
Dibble, David S. and Dessamae Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter. A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Memorial Museum, Miscellaneous Papers, No. 1, pp.
1-78.
Gould, Frank W.
1975 Texas Plants -- A Check List and Ecological Summary. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station Publication No. MP-585, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas.
Graham, R. W.
1976 Pleistocene and Holocene Mammals, Taphonomy, and Paleoecology
of the Friesenhahn Cave Local Fauna, Baxer County, Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Graham, Allen and Charles Heimsch
1960 Pollen Studies of Some Texas Peat Deposits. Ecology, Vol. 41, pp.
785-790.
Hafsten, Ulf
1961 Pleistocene Development of Vegetation and Climate in the Southern
High Plains as Evidenced by Pollen Analysis. Paleoecology of the
Llano Estacado. Museum of New Mexico Press, pp. 59-91.
Haynes, C. Vance
1968 Geochronology of Late Quaternary Alluvium. In: Means of
Cornolation of Quaternary Successions. University of Utah Press,
pp. 591-631.
Janssen, C. R.
1966Recent Pollen Spectra from The Deciduous and ConiferousDeciduous Forests of Northeastern Minnesota: A Study in Pollen
Dispersal. Ecology, Vol. 47, No.5, pp. 804-825.

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Johnson, Eileen
1974 Zooarcheology and the Lubbock Lake Site. In: C. C. Black (ed.)
History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site, Texas Tech
University, pp. 107-122. Lubbock, Texas.
Johnson, Leroy
1963 Pollen Analysis of two Archeological Sites at Amistad Reservoir,
Texas. The Texas lournal of Science, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 225-230.
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir
Val Verde County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 6, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Krieger, Alex D.
1964 Early Man in the New World. In: Jesse D. Jennings and Edward
Norbeck (eds.) Prehistoric Man in the New World. The University
of Chicago Press.
Lundelius, Ernest L.
1967 Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal History of Central Texas.
Pleistocene Extinction, The Search For a Cause. Yale University
Press, pp. 287-320 New Haven, Connecticut.
1974 The Last 15,000 Years of Faunal Change in North America. The
Museum Journal, Vol. XV, pp. 141-160.
Mack, Richard N. and V. M. Bryant Jr.
1974 Modern Pollen Spectra from the Columbia Basin, Washington.
Northwest Science, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 183-194.
1978 Modern Forest Pollen Spectra from Washington and Northern
Idaho. Botanical Gazette (in press).
Maher, L. J.
1963 Pollen Analysis of Surface Materials from the Southern San Juan
Mountains, Colorado. Geological Society America Bulletin, Vol. 74,
pp. 1485-1503.
Martin, Paul S. and John E. Guilday
1967 A Bestiary for Pleistocene Biologists. In: Pleistocene Extinctions, the
Search for a Cause. Yale University Press, pp. 1-62, New Haven,
Connecticut.
Martin, Paul S. and B. F. Harrell
1957 Pleistocene History of Temperate Biotas in Mexico and the Eastern
United States. Ecology Vol. 38, pp. 468-480.
Martin, Paul S. and P. J. Mehringer, Jr.
1965 Pleistocene Pollen Analysis and Biogeography of the Southwest. In:
The Quaternary of the United States. Princeton University Press,
pp. 433-451, Princeton, New Jersey.
Mehringer, P. J., J. E. King and E. H. Lindsay
1970 A Record of Wisconsin A Vegetation and Fauna from the Ozarks of
Western Missouri. In: Pleistocene and Recent Environments of the
Central Great Plains. University of Kansas Press, pp. 173-184,
Lawrence, Kansas.
Oldfield, Frank and James Schoenwetter
1975 Discussion of the Pollen Analytical Evidence. In: Late Pleistocene
Environments in the Southern High Plains. Fort Burgwin Research
Center Publication No. 9, pp. 149-178.
Patton, Peter C.
1977 Geomorphic Criteria for Estimating the Magnitude and Frequency
of Flooding in Central Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, ’Fhe University of
Texas at Austin.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

25

Potzger, J. E. and B. C. Tharp
1943 Pollen Record of Canadian Spruce and Fir from a Texas Bog.
Science, Vol. 98, pp. 584-585.
1947 Pollen Profile from a Texas Bog. Ecology, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 462466.
1954 Pollen Study of Two Bogs in Texas. Ecology, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 462466.
Reeves, C. C.
1963 Pleistocene Climate of the Llano Estacado, II. The lournal of
Geology, Vol. 74, No. 5, pp. 642-647.
Sellards, E. H., G. L. Evans and G. E. Meade
1947 Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas, with
Descriptions of Artifacts by Alex D. Krieger. Bulletin of the
Geological Society of America, Vol. 58, pp. 927-954.
Sharer, Harry J.
1975 Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. Paper presented at the
Paleo-Indian Lifeways Symposium, Lubbock, Texas.
Shafer, Harry J. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1977 Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas A&M University Anthropology Research
Laboratory Special Series No. 1..
Slaughter, B. H.
1963 Some Observations concerning the Genus Smilodon, with Special
References to Smilodon fatalis. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol.
10, pp. 68-81.
Suhm, Dee Ann, A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society Vol. 25, pp. 1-256.
Van Devender, T. R., P. S. Martin, A. M. Phillips, III, and W. G. Spaulding
1978 Late Pleistocene Biotic Communities from the Guadalupe
Mountains, Culberson County, Texas. In: R.H. Wauer and D.H.
Riskind (ed.) Transactions of the Symposium on the Biological
Resources of the Chihuahuan Desert Region, U.S. and Mexico
Government Printed Office, Washington (in press).
Wells, Philip V.
1966 Late Pleistocene Vegetation and Degree of Pluvial Climatic Change
in the Chihauhuan Desert. Science Vol. 153, No. 3739, pp. 970-975.
Wilson, L. R.
1966 Palynology of the Domebo Site. In: Frank Leonhardy (ed.), A PaleoIndian Mammoth Kill in the Prairie-Plains. Contribution of the
Museum of the Great Plains, No. 1, pp. 44-50.

A DISCUSSION OF POSSIBLE ASIATIC INFLUENCES
ON TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY
LELAND W. PATTERSON

ABSTRACT
Details of the lithic technology from an archeological site of possible
Pleistocene age in Medina County, Texas are presented. This lithic
collection is similar to assemblages from the early Upper Paleolithic of
northeast Asia, with some Mousterian-like elements. This Texas lithic
technology may be related to an Asiatic migration to the New World at
approximately 25,000 B.C., as proposed by Borden and Muller-Beck.

INTRODUCTION
Over the years, there has been a great amount of speculation on
the origin of the Paleo-lndian lithic tradition in the New World,
with early dates for use of fluted projectile points, as summarized
by Haynes (1967). References are too numerous to summarize, and
they provide a number of differing opinions. While there seems to
be a consensus that early peopling of the New World was from
Asia, there is not general agreement on the chronology or
subsequent technological developments (Wormington 1971). Borden
(1969) has pointed out that there is increasing evidence for people
being in southern North America during the last glaciation, when
the route to Asia may have been blocked by ice. Borden proposed a
Protowestern Tradition crossing the Bering land bridge from Asia
to Alaska at about 25,000 B.C., and proceeding southward through
the intermontane plateau of British Columbia, to become the
forerunner of the Paleo-lndian tradition in southern North America.
This paper will consider some evidence from Texas for the PaleoIndian deriving from a movement from Asia at some time before the
terminal Pleistocene, at a period when an ice-free passage to
southern North America was available.
While reports on Paleo-lndian sites south of Canada are
becoming more numerous (cf. Kraft 1973 and Frison 1974), with the
exception of Dragoo (1973a,b) there have been few serious attempts
to compare these collections with others, in an effort to find
technological sources. Probably because of the proximity to Asia,
more work has been done in the far north to characterize early
lithic assemblages of possible Asiatic derivation. This includes
reports by MacNeish (1964), West (1973a,b), Anderson (1970), and
Irving (1971). Even more work has been done on post-Pleistocene

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Asiatic contacts with North America, especially microblade
technology as recently summarized by Smith (1974).
Muller-Beck (1966) proposed the movement of Upper Paleolithic
people over the Bering land bridge to the New World at
approximately

25,000 B.C.,

with lithic

technology having some

Mousterian-like elements. Rudenko (1961: 209) has noted the
presence of Mousterian traits in the Siberian Upper Paleolithic.
Borden (1969: 6-9) then hypothesizes the possible movement of
these people southward into western North America. The PaleoIndian fluted point is viewed as a subsequent indigenous
development, especially prominent east of the Rocky Mountains.
Borden has named the original lithic technology arriving from Asia
the "Proto-western Tradition." Principal lithic traits are: "large
biface knives and leaf-shaped points, scrapers in a wide range of
size and type, occasionally crude or even well made blades, but
never microblades. Varying quantities of pebble tools are usually
present." (Borden 1969: 8). Chapman (1975: Fig. 2-3) presents a
similar collection of traits as being available for export from Asia
in the early Upper Paleolithic.
Hadleigh-West (1973a,b) has reported on similar early type lithic
materials in the Tangle Lakes area of Alaska. This has been named
the Amphi-theater Mountain Complex, and is described as a late
Middle Paleolithic stone industry. Hadleigh-West notes the possible
Asiatic affiliation of this Technology. Soviet archeologists would
seem to be noting Mousterian-like elements in the Upper Paleolithic
in northeast Asia, with terms such as "Epi-Levallois cores" (Powers
1974: 31). Hadleigh-West (personal communication) feels that this is
an unfortunate choice of terminology, as these cores are simply
generalized forms from the Upper Paleolithic. Chard (1974: 207)
does not see any clear cut Asiatic lithic tradition affiliations with
North America before terminal Pleistocene time. MacNeish (1976)
describes a Pleistocene "Stage Ill" lithic tradition with blades,
burins, and leaf-shaped points found throughout the Americas that
fits well with Borden’s Protowest Tradition. D’Amare (1965) has
noted Mousterian-like elements in early lithic assemblages of the
Americas.
I feel that a body of evidence now exists to support the concept
of Asiatic early Upper Paleolithic technology as the forerunner of
Paleo-lndian technology, with fluted points evolving from leafshaped points. Wormington (1962) has previously discussed this
hypothetical evolution of projectile points. Borden (1969: 8) has
given possible examples of this tradition in North America, and his
Protowestern label seems to be an appropriate and handy title.

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

29

SITE 41 ME 3, MEDINA CO. TEXAS
There is a site with an undated surface collection in central
Texas that appears to have all of the qualifying traits of the early
lithic tradition being discussed. This assemblage can best be
described as similar to an Asiatic early Upper Paleolithic
collection, with several Mousterian-like elements. Site 41 ME 3 in
Medina County, Texas was originally published {Patterson 1975} as
a brief survey of a quarry site, with Paleo-Indian type prismatic
blade technology. Enough additional material has now been found
on this site to propose that it is also a hilltop campsite.
Appropriately, a hilltop campsite would match the concept of early
occupation, as later Archaic period sites in central Texas seem
more oriented to lower riverine adaptation. Irving and Cinq-Mars
{1974: 65} and Dragoo (1973a: 46} have noted the tendency in other
locations for early sites to be on high ground as "lookout" sites,
1. F. Epstein (personal communication} has noted high elevation
Paleo-Indian sites in northern Mexico, and Patterson and Adams
{1977) have described an archeological complex of this nature in
Kendall County, Texas. 1. I. Hester (1975: 249} has noted the tendency
of Paleo-Indian campsites in the southern high plains to be located on
high ground as possible "lookout" sites.
Site 41 ME 3 is located in the rolling foothills on the southern
edge of the central Texas hill country, at the boundary of the
Edwards Plateau. The surface geology is Cretaceous, with a thin
layer of more recent soil. Lithic raw materials are available as flint
nodules in the weathered limestone. The area presently supports a
large deer population, and earlier, large herd animals were
probably present, such as buffalo and elk, and possibly Pleistocene
fauna such as horse and elephant. Because of the thin soil layer
and because of limited time available to the writer, work on this
site has been limited to surface collection. No materials suitable for
radiocarbon dating have been found. Although only a surface
collection is available, the lithic artifacts comprise a rather
homogeneous technology, and it is felt that only one cultural
tradition is present.
Lithic traits of site 41 ME 3 appropriate to the concept of the
Protowestern Tradition are:
1. Mousterian-like technology
a. discoidal cores
b. thick flake scrapers, steeply retouched by percussion
c. Mousteroid points
d. notched tools
e. denticulates

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

30

TABLE 1. SITE 41 ME 3 GENERAL LITHIC COLLECTION

discoidal cores
blade cores
amorphous cores
blade core fragments
blade core trim flakes, facial
large hammerstone
pebble tools, chopper-like
bifaces
35 to 50 mm square
50 to 70 mm square
over 70 mm square (see original)
fragments
biface subtotal
beaked tools and gravers
notched tools
denticula tes
flake choppers
Mousteroid points
unifacial ovoid scrapers
dihedral burin on blade
dihedral burin on biface
oblique burins on flakes
heat treated flint (more possible)
small triangular bifaces
leaf shaped projectile points
leaf shaped preforms
table subtotal

12175

No.
13
13
12
8
3
1
4

%
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.6
0.2
0.1
0.3

17
15
10
10

1.2
1.1
0.7
0.7

52

3.7

42
54
17
3
8
9
1
1
2
8
4
4
13

3.1
3.9
1.2
0.2
0.6
0.7
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.3
0.3
0.9

272

19.7

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

31

TABLE 2. SITE 41 ME 3 FLAKE COLLECTION

12/75
No.

%

14
69
229
400
187
23

1.0
5.0
16.6
28.8
13.5
1.7

subtotal
blade-like flakes (B)
15 to 20 mm wide
20 to 25 mm wide
25 to 30 mm wide
30 to 35 mm wide
35 to 40 mm wide
40 to 45 mm wide
45 to 50 mm wide
50 to 55 mm wide

922

66.6

4
9
26
26
21
9
3
3

0.3
0.7
1.9
1.9
1.5
0.6
0.2
0.2

subtotal
prismatic blades (C)
10 to 15 mm wide
15 to 20 mm wide
20 to 25 mm wide
25 to 30 mm wide
30 to 35 mm wide
35 to 40 mm wide
40 to 45 mm wide
45 to 50 mm wide

101

7.3

1
4
25
26
21
7
2
2

0.1
0.3
1.8
1.9
1.6
0.5
0.1
0.1

88

6.4

1111
1383

80.3
100.0

irregular shaped flint flakes (A)
!5 to 20 mm square
20 to 25 mm square
25 to 35 mm square
35 to 50 mm square
50 to 70 mm square
over 70 mm square

subtotal
table subtotal
total collection

(A) over 80% retouched edges; avg. thickness 11.7mm, range 4 to 24 mm
(B) ave. length 58 mm, range 30 to 125mm; avg, thickness 12mm, range 5 to 27
(C) avg. length 62mm, range 39 to 98ram; avg. thickness 10.2mm, range 4 to 23, 31%
endscrapers

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

2. Primitive prismatic blade technology, using direct percussion,
with Siberian type prepared platform cores (Powers 1974: 31).
3. An assortment of leaf-shaped and cordiform bifaces from
handaxe to projectile point size
4. Pebble tools (chopper-like cores}
5. No microblades
A statistically significant lithic sample has been obtained from site
41 ME 3, as summarized in Tables I and II. All material is flint,
principally of grey, black, and brown single colors. While the overall
site is very large, winding around a ridge for some 3000 feet, the main
concentration of artifacts is in an area of approximately 400 by 600
feet, where the natural outcropping of flint nodules is densest. This
collection is rather unique, for the possible early lithic technology
represented, in that the complete technology is available for study;
including finished artifacts, preforms, cores, and chipping debitage.
Direct percussion was used extensively, and there is no evidence of
pressure flaking. This is confirmed not only by retouch patterns on
artifacts, but also by the analysis of small percussion flakes under 18
mm square in size {Patterson and Sollberger ms}, and no evidence of
any pressure flakes. Heat treating of flint was used. Several pieces of
flint have reddened discoloration and "potlidded" surfaces typical of
excessive, non-useful thermal alteration. A large number of flint
flakes may show heat treating because of their waxy luster. Some of
the artifacts are shown in Figures 1 to 5, including all of the principal
diagnostic types.
Several of the artifact types present have been illustrated by Klein
(1973: Figs. 6,7) as being typical of the Mousterian, including a large
variety of steeply retouched flint flake scrapers, discoidal cores,
notches, and denticulates. Both cutting and scraping edge retouch
patterns are present on the irregular flint flakes summarized in Table
If, with the greatest number indicating possible scraper function. All
of the scraper shapes illustrated by Klein for the Mousterian are
present, in various combinations of straight, convex, and concave
edges. Mousteroid points resemble ones shown by Bordes (1972) from
several European Mousterian sites. Laughlin (1975) has demonstrated
these points to be present in the New World, at Anangula in the
Aleutians. A large variety of bifaces Is present on site 41 ME 3 in
various sizes, most with leaf-shaped and condiform outlines. Large
bifaces have been called handaxes in the Texas hill country for a
number of years. The unifacial ovoid scrapers are domed-shaped,
resembling turtle shells, and are possible examples of the Levallois
flake technique. A few burins are present. One dihedral burin on a
prismatic blade segment has been identified by J. F. Epstein (personal

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

33

C

D

B
A

FIGURE 1. A, Notched tool; B, beaked tool; C, dihedral burin; D,
denticulate; E, discoidal core.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

34

communication) of the University of Texas at Austin. Alexander
(1974) feels that burins are firmly established in North American
Pleistocene assemblages. Leaf-shaped projectile points are the major
type, all with the characteristic stepped retouch from use of direct
hard percussion. Some of these points have slight stems, formed by
removal of small amounts of material on the lateral edges, but there is
no basal grinding. Four percussion-made triangular bifaces present
probably represent projectile points and preforms.

A

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7cm

D
B
0

FIGURE 2. A,
preforms.

1

2

3

semi-conical

4

5

blade

6

7Cm

core;

B-E,

projectile

point

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

35

Blade-like flakes shown in Table II consist of prismatic flakes too
short to be classified as blades, and miscellaneous elongated flakes
with parallel lateral edges. A true prismatic blade industry is also
present, mostly in the form of large wide blades. This is very
different from the small blades of the Archaic period in this same
Texas hill country, and on the upper Texas coast. Differences in
Texas blade technologies have been discussed in a previous paper
(Patterson 1976). Both single and multiple facet striking platforms
were used, with more cores and blades showing use of single facet
platforms. Typical blade cores are semi-conical in shape, with the
striking platform formed simply by a single blow to remove the end
of a flint nodule. Almost all blades have retouch on one or both
lateral edges, and over 30% also show use as end scrapers.

0

1

2

3

4.

5

6

7cm

A

I
H

FIGURE 3. A-D, leaf-shaped projectile points; E-I, prismatic blades.

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The lithic collection from site 41 ME 3 consists of 1383 artifacts
and many pieces of small chipping debitage. Compared to other
Texas collections, it can be classified as a very heavy tool industry.
It remains to be determined if this site is a true Protowestern type
site (pre-Clovis) or a later site following the Protowestern tradition.
Site 41 ME 3 may not be an isolated phenomenon. Nearby sites
have a number of the same lithic traits as site 41 ME 3, with no
sign of pressure flaking or other later lithic traits. As with site 41
ME 3, these other sites could be considered as simple quarry sites
because of chipping debitage at locations where lithic raw material
occurs naturally. However, practically all flint flakes show signs of
wear and heavy retouch, and lithic tool kits are present, not just
specialized quarry activity remains.

TECHNOLOGICAL COMPARISONS
A number of comparisons are possible for the lithic technology of
site 41 ME 3 with other lithic collections to show both similarities
and contrasts. Lithic flake thickness is an important attribute.
Texas middle to late Archaic sites surveyed by the writer can be
classified as thin flake industries, with most flake thicknesses
ranging from 2 to 5 mm. This is in sharp contrast with the average
flake thickness of 11.7 mm for site 41 ME 3. Wilmsen (1970: Table
7) has summarized several Paleo4ndian collections with thick
flakes, although considerable variation is shown. Flake size may
also be important. Archaic period sites in this Texas hill country
surveyed by the writer have few flakes over 40 mm square
(Patterson and Adams 1977), and the large number of flakes over 50
mm square on site 41 ME 3 may be an indication of earlier lithic
technology.
Frank C. Hibben (personal communication) of the University of
New Mexico sees similarities of the overall lithic technology of site
41 ME 3 with the Sandia, including prismatic blades, leaf-shaped
bifaces, denticulates, and Mousteroid points. This is consistent with
the Pleistocene nature of site 41 ME 3 proposed here. Although
there is not general agreement that the Sandia has pre-Clovis
dating, it is at least firmly within the Pleistocene period.
There is a general resemblance of many flakes from site 41 ME 3
with the scrapers described by Alexander (1963) for the Levi PaleoIndian site in central Texas. Alexander shows a number of
basically leaf-shaped points in this collection. Alexander (personal
communication) has recently done work on a pre-Clovis stratum at
the Levi site, but only crude utilized flakes and bone tools were

37

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

found. Carl H. Chapman (personal communication) of the University
of Missouri has informed me that there is a site (Shriver site} in
northwest Missouri which appears to underlie fluted points, that
has lithic technology that may be similar to site 41 ME 3, but I have
not yet been able to obtain any detailed information on the
Missouri site.

C

A

D

B
0

1

2

3

5

4

6

7 cm

F

E
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7 cm

FIGURE 4. A-D, triangular bifaces; E-F, large bifaces.

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Wells Creek site in Tennessee reported by Dragoo (1973a) is
a Paleo-Indian site with Clovis fluted points. It also has leaf-shaped
bifaces, large prismatic blades, thick flake scrapers, discoidal
cores, and polyhedral cores. Dragoo (1973b} has discussed possible
Asiatic affiliations for the cores. This site could represent the
evolved form of the Protowestern tradition. Like site 41 ME 3, the
Wells Creek site has beaked, notched, and denticulate flake tools.
West’s (1973a,b) early Amphitheater Mountain complex in Alaska
also contains these tool types.
Paleo-Indian prismatic blade technology is of the large type, with
blades generally grouping over 20 mm in width (Converse 1973: 14,
Green 1963, Hammatt 1969, Kraft 1973}. This is a statistical
grouping and some smaller blades can be present. Cores to produce
these large blades are similar to the "Epi-Levallois" Siberian cores
(Powers 1974: 31}, where examples are available. Examples of
cores of this type in North America that might fit the Protowestern
Tradition have been given by Hadleigh-West (1973a: P1. III), Dragoo
(1973a: Fig. 27), Chapman (1975: Pig. 4-13}, and Patterson (1975:
Fig. 2}. These are polyhedral cores from which large blades have
been detached, with acute angle striking platforms. There is a
minimum of purposeful striking platform edge preparation, at least
on the Texas examples. This type of blade technology can be
replicated by direct hard percussion (Sollberger and Patterson
1976, Crabtree and Swanson 1968}. Some microblades can be
produced fortuitously in small quantities, but not as a distinct
industry.
One prominent attribute on blades using this
manufacturing technique is the high percentage of striking
platforms crushed on the dorsal surface, leaving a thin or
negligible residual striking platform on the blade. For example,
50% of the blades from site 41 ME 3 have crushed striking
platforms. It has been proposed {Sollberger and Patterson 1976}
that blade technology introduced into southern North America
before the terminal Pleistocene employed direct percussion
exclusively, and that indirect percussion and pressure techniques
for smaller blades were technologies introduced from Asia in postPleistocene time. These later technological introductions apply
south of the main glaciation. Lithic techniques could have arrived
earlier in Alaska before there was an ice-free passage to the south
at the end of the last glaciation, and West 1973a: 10) shows dates
for the Denali tradition with microblades as early as 9000 B.C.

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

A

39

B

D

0

I

2

3

4

S

6

7 cm

FIGURE 5. A, unifacial scraper; B, ovoid scraper; C-D, Mousteroid
points; E-H, large flake scrapers.

The lithic elements mentioned here as deriving from a
Protowestern tradition in formation of the Paleo-Indian traditions in
southern North America can be noted in a number of Paleo-Indian
collections. Irwin and Wormington (1970), for example, summarize
Paleo-Indian tools from the Plains area, with many of the tool types

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mentioned for the Protowestern tradition. Kraft (1973) shows
similar tool types for a Paleo-Indian site in New Jersey. There are
several reasons why few comparisons have been made between
lithic technologies of northeast Asia and the Paleo-Indian of
southern North America. First of all is the small amount of data
previously available for both areas. In North America, many PaleoIndian kill sites simply did not yield complete lithic collections.
Secondly, there has been a general failure to note Pleistocene type
lithic technology in North America if not associated with fluted
points. Also, more attention has been given to projectile points than
to other basic lithic technology. Much more attention has been
given to the variability of lithic traits, such as projectile points, in
Paleo-Indian collections than in recognizing the basic continuity of
this lithic tradition. Some of this continuity has been recognized.
Jennings (1974: 133) notes that terminal Pleistocene prismatic
blades are similar to Clovis examples. Finally, in comparing
Pleistocene lithic collections, a great amount of impressionistic
personal opinions have been given, instead of detailed technical
analyses.
Two direct comparisons can be made of sites in northeast Asia
with site 41 ME 3. One is that every lithic component of the Ust’
Kanskaia site (Rudenko 1961), which is represented as a Siberian
early Upper Paleolithic collection, is also present in the collection
of site 41 ME 3. This includes: discoidal implements, massive flake
tools, large prismatic blades, Mousteroid points, leaf-shaped
bifaces, burins, beaked tools (perforators), notched tools, and
chopping, scraping and cutting tools. Another comparison that can
be made for site 41 ME 3 is with the Dyuktai Upper Paleolithic
culture (Mochanov 1973) of northeast Asia. Comparable lithic
components are: leaf-shaped points, triangular points, large
bifaces, large prismatic blades, pebble tools, burins, large
scrapers, large flake knives, denticulates, discoidal cores, and
polyhedral large blade cores. The later Dyuktai type sites at
approximately 11,000 to 12,000 B.C. have a microblade industry
using Gobi type wedge-shaped cores, while site 41 ME 3 does not
have a microblade component. This may be interpreted that the
Texas site is related to the early end of the Dyuktai culture at
approximately 25,000 B.C., before the development of microblade
technology. Mochanov (1973: 12) has noted the general similarity of
the Dyuktai lithic technology with New World Paleo-Indian
technology, except for microblades.
It would seem desirable to compare the site 41 ME 3 lithic
collection with quarry-workshop sites commonly found in central

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

41

Texas. However, surprisingly little has been published on quarryworkshop sites. There is a series of reports on quarry-workshops in
Comal County (Hester, Bass and Kelly 1975, Kelly and Hester
1975a,b) with many sites in a complex of apparent Archaic age.
There are apparently two classes of quarry-workshops found in
central Texas. One type is primarily a quarry-workshop, which may
or may not also have been the scene of some lithic tool use. The
other type is a campsite located at or near lithic source areas,
where complete lithic reductions to finished tools and much tool
use occurs. The Comal County quarry-workshops are of the first
type of site, and site 41 ME 3 is of the second type. Several
comparisons can be made between site 41 ME 3 and the Comal
sites:
i. While no detailed data were given for the Comal sites, and
large flake tools are present, I have the impression that the
flakes generally tend to be smaller than the distribution given
in Table II for site 41 ME 3, as small flake tools and a small
blade core are mentioned for the Comal sites. I feel that flake
size distributions are important information rarely given in
archeological reports. The flake size distribution of site 41 ME
3 runs much larger than for Archaic campsites surveyed by
the author in Bandera and Kendall Counties.
2. A number of lithic components found at site 41 ME 3 are not
present on the Comal sites, indicating a more complex tool kit
for the Medina County site. Items not present on the Comal
sites include burins, beaks and gravers, and Mousteroid
(Mousterian-like) points. The Comal sites also do not have a
well defined industry for making and using large prismatic
blades in significant quantities.
3. Site 41 ME 3 has a collection of irregular shaped lithic flakes
with 9.7% primary cortex flakes, 43.5% secondary cortex
flakes, and 46.8% interior flakes. This tends to show a greater
emphasis on the lithic reduction process at site 41 ME 3 than
at the Comal quarry-workshop sites, where primary flakes
averaged 23°/’o (Kelly and Hester 1975b: 13).
4. The high percentage of flakes utilized as tools on site 41 ME 3
would certainly not be expected on sites which are predominantly quarry-workshops, and this is not evidenced on the
Comal sites.
5. As a summary comment, published quarry-workshop sites in
south-central Texas, which seem to be mainly of Archaic age,
simply do not have the "Protowestern" mix of lithic technology.

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CONCLUSIONS
From the above discussion, it is proposed that the list of
Pleistocene tradition lithic traits in the New World that are
possibly derived from northeast Asia include the following
elements:
1. discoidal cores
2. thick large flake scrapers, steeply retouched by percussion
and in wide variety
3. leaf-shaped and cordiform bifaces and projectile points
4. triangular points
5. large prismatic blades
6. crude polyhedral blade cores, prepared platforms
7. pebble tools, chopper-like
8. no microblade industry (some small blades could be present}
9. notched tools
10. denticulate tools
11. absence of specialized bifacial projectile points with flutes or
distinctive stem types
12. beaked tools
13. no significant fine pressure flaking
14. generally thick heavy lithic flake industry
15. burins may be present
16. sometimes Mousteroid points
Many of these traits have long continuity into the later Archaic
period in North America, so that the combination of traits in the
total lithic collection is the important feature of the Protowestern
tradition, along with the absence of traits generally accepted as
starting later. Dragoo {1973: 53} thinks that there may be some of
these type of heavy tool industry sites in Tennessee. It is hoped that
this article will stimulate others to be alert for this type of lithic
collection. As shown here, sites do exist in southern North America
which fit Borden’s criteria for Protowestern assemblages, and work
should be done to establish confirming chronology.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Appreciation is expressed to Frederick Hadleigh-West of the
University of Wisconsin for helpful comments regarding the preparation
of this paper. Also, thanks is given to Jeremiah F. Epstein (University of
Texas at Austin}, Frank C. Hibben (University of New Mexico}, Herbert
L. Alexander (Simon Fraser University}, Carl H. Chapman (University of
Missouri}, and Thomas R. Hester (University of Texas at San Antonio)
for additional information. Final responsibility for conclusions remains
with the author.

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

43

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, H. L., Jr.
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central Texas, American
Antiquity Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 510-528.
1974The Association of Aurignacoid Elements with Fluted Point
Complexes in North America, International Conference on the
Prehistory and Paleoecology of Western North American Arctic
and Subarctic, University of Calgary.
Anderson, D. D.
1970 Akmak, Acta Arctica, Fast. 16, Copenhagen.
Borden, C. E.
1969Early population movements from Asia into western North
America, Syesis, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 1-13.
Bordes, F.
1972 A Tale of Two Caves, Harper and Row.
Chapman, C. H.
1975 The Archaeology of Missouri, I, University of Missouri Press.
Chard, C. S.
1974 Northeast Asia in Prehistory, University of Wisconsin Press.
Converse, R. N.
1973 Ohio Flint Types, Archaeological Society of Ohio, Special
Publication.
Crabtree, D. E. and E. H. Swanson, Jr.
1968 Edge Ground Cobbles and Blade Making in the Northwest, Tebiwa,
Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 50-58.
D’Amare, R. T.
1965 E1 Antropogeno de Siberia y E1 Hombre Americano, Investigaciones
8, Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Mexico
Dragoo, D. W.
1973a Wells Creek -- An Early Man Site in Stewart County, Tennessee,
Archaeology of Eastern North America, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 1-55.
1973b The Trimmed-Core Tradition in Asiatic-American Contacts, 9th
International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological
Sciences, Chicago.
Frison, G. C.
1974 The Casper Site, Academic Press.
Green, F. E.
1963 The Clovis Blades: an important addition to the Llano Complex,
American Antiquity, Vol. 29, pp. 145-165.
Hammatt, H. H.
1969 Paleo-Indian Blades from Western Oklahoma, Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 193-198.
Haynes, C. V., Jr.
1967 Carbon-14 Dates and Early Man in the New World, in Pleistocene
Extinctions, editors P.S. Martin and H.E. Wright, Jr., Yale
University Press.
Hester, J. J.
1975Paleoarchaeology of the Llano Estacado, in Late Pleistocene
Environments of the Southern High Plains, F. Wendorf and J.J.
Hester, Fort Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist Univ.

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hester, T. R, F. A. Bass, Jr. and T. C. Kelly
1975 Archaeological Survey of Portions of the Comal River Watershed,
Comal County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report
10.
Irving, W. N.
1971 Recent Early Man Research in the North, Arctic Anthropology, Vol.
8, No. 2, pp. 68-82.
Irving, W. N. and I. Cinq-Mars
1974 A Tentative Archaeological Sequence for Old Crow Flats, Yukon
Territory, Arctic Anthropology, Supplement 11, pp. 65-81.
Irwin, H. T. and H. M. Wormington
1970 PaleoIndian Tool Types in the Great Plains, American Antiquity,
Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 24-34.
lennings, J. D.
1974 Prehistory of North America, Second Edition, McGraw-Hill.
Kelly, T. C. and T. R. Hester
1975a Additional Archaeological Survey in the Dry Comal Watershed,
Comal County, South Central Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report 10.
1975b Archaeological Investigations at Four Sites in the Dry Comal
Watershed, Comal County, South Central Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archaeological Survey Report 15.
Klein, R. G.
1973 Ice-Age Hunters of the Ukraine, University of Chicago Press.
Kraft, H. C.
1973 The Plenge Site: A Paleo-Indian Occupation Site in New Jersey,
Archaeology of Eastern North America, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 56-117.
Laughlin, W. S.
1975 Aleuts: Ecosystem, Holocene History and Siberian Origin, Science,
Vol. 189, pp. 507-515.
MacNeish, R. S.
1964 Investigations in the Southwest Yukon, Papers of the R. S. Peabody
Foundation for Archaeology, Vol. 6.
1976 Early Man in the New World, American Scientist, Vol. 64, pp. 316327.
Mochanov, Y. A.
1973 Early Migrations to America in the Light of a Study of the Dyuktai
Paleolithic Culture of Northeast Asia, 9th International Congress of
Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences, Chicago.
Muller-Beck, H.
1966 Paleohunters in America: origins and diffusion, Science, Vol. 152,
pp. 1191-1210.
Patterson, L. W.
1975 A Quarry Site in Medina County, Texas, La Tierra, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 19-23.
1976 Blade Technology in the Texas Archaic, in The Texas Archaic: A
Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester, Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 2.

TEXAS PLEISTOCENE LITHIC TECHNOLOGY

45

Patterson, L. W. and J. H. Adams.
1977 An Archeological Complex in Kendall Co., Texas, La Tierra, Vol. 4,
No. 2, pp. 6-16.
Patterson, L. W. and J. B. Sollberger
ms. Small Lithic Flake Classification, submitted to Plains Anthropologist.
Journal of Archaeology.
Powers, W. R.
1973 Paleolithic Man in Northeast Asia, Arctic Anthropology, Vol. 10,
No. 2.
Rudenko, S. I.
1961 The Ust’ Kanskaia Paleolithic Cave Site, Siberia, American
Antiquity, Vol. 27, No. 2, pp. 203-215.
Smith, J. W.
1974 The Northeast Asian-Northwest American Microblade Tradition,
Journal of Field Archaeology, Vol. 1, Nos. 3, 4, pp. 347-364.
Sollberger, J. B. and L. W. Patterson
1976 Prismatic Blade Replication, American Antiquity, Vol. 41, No. 4,
pp. 517-531.
West, F. H.
1973a Old World Affinities of Archaeological Complexes from Tangle
Lakes, Central Alaska, All-Union Conference on the Bering Land
Bridge, Khabarovsk, USSR.
1973b The Significance of Typologically Early Site Collections in the
Tangle Lakes, Central Alaska: A Preliminary Consideration,
International Conference on the Prehistory and Paleoecology of
Western North American Arctic and Subarctic, University of
Calgary.
Wilmsen, E. N.
1970 Lithic Analysis and Cultural Inference: A Paleo-Indian Case,
University of Arizona Press.
Wormington, H. M.
1962 A Survey of Early American Prehistory, American Scientist, Vol.
50, No. 1, pp. 230-242.
1971 Comments on Early Man in North America 1960-1970, Arctic
Anthropology, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 83-91.

ON FLUTING FOLSOM: NOTES ON RECENT
EXPERIMENTS

J. B. SOLLBERGER
ABSTRACT
Some of the problems and variables involved in the replication of
Folsom fluted points are presented. The differences in the more common
types of breakage patterns are described along with the possible causes.

This paper describes channel flute fracture patterns which can
occur in replicating the classic Folsom projectile point. Crabtree
(1966) has presented the only comprehensive description of
replicative experiments involving the Folsom type. Others (cf. Judge
1970) have presented analysis and production trajectories which
were not checked by replicative procedures. Questions still remain
regarding type attributes and production technology for Folsom. I
would like, therefore, to make available certain comments on the
fluting process that result from my own experiments during the
past several years.
Channel flute scars provide some information about Folsom
preforming and lateral edge retouch. I have observed three channel
flute styles on artifacts (Fig. 1A, B and C) and the technological
implications of these attributes deserve comment. The example
shown in Figure 1A has the most acute lateral edge angles and
represents the fluting of a completed preform with no additional
retouch to the edges. The example shown in Figure 1B has an
additional series of short flakes removed by lateral edge retouch;
these do not extend to the ridge crests of the flute. I use a fluting
clamp in my experiments and sometimes retouch the lateral edges
to make the preform fit the fluting clamp better (Why did the
Indians do such retouching?). The specimen illustrated in Figure 1B
has a lateral edge cross-section that is less acute than that on
Figure 1A because of this additional edge retouch. The third style
of edge flaking on artifacts (Fig. 1C) has lateral edge retouch that
was applied after the fluting. This style has the least acute (_ 90°)
edge angles. Style C retouch is done from style A or B lateral edges
and brings the edges closest to the channel scar ridges and slightly
rounds them off without penetrating into the channel scar itself. A
fellow flint-knapper, Bruce Bradley, does this replication technique
most convincingly. Since these styles represent technological
attributes, I suggest that their distribution may have regional
significance.

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

1

2

B

¢

3

d

g
FIGURE 1. Folsom point cross sections A, B, C styles -- described
in the text. Profiles E-J, illustrating break pattern types. Snap
breaks are E and F; roll-out fractures are H and I; G is a step
fracture; the common hinged fracture is J.
Bradley (personal communication) notes that aboriginal Folsom
specimens have channel scars that are virtually free of undulations
and compression rings. He suggests that perc~ssion fluting may be
the explanation for this. My fluting experiments on Folsom have
been almost exclusively by lever-pressure flaking using heat
treated Edwards Plateau cherts. Some examples, on identical
material, have unblemished channel scars and some are badly
undulated or rippled. I attribute these "blemishes" to a lack of
"fracture harmony" (Sollberger ms.) and not to pressure or
percussion flaking methods.

49

EXPERIMENTS ON FLUTING FOLSOM

Regarding preform distal end preparation for fluting, Crabtree
(1966) notes that the tip should be beveled to free the end of the
flute flake. Judge (1970) believes that the aboriginal flint-knappers
had the flutes terminating well short of the distal end, following
which the preform was then worked down to the shortest channel
scar. My experiments do not follow either of the above fabricating
trajectories. I grind the distal tip once for both flutes. Some flute
flakes break in removal and some do not. This observation brings
up the questions: what percentage of artifact points have tip
forming flakes entering the channel scar; and, what percentage of
artifact flutes were broken by the Folsom flint-knappers?

3
I
C Tll

FIGURE 2. Replications of fluted points and break patterns.

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Crabtree (1966) found that lateral edge clamping and tip support
was either necessary or at least a great aid in fluting the preform.
My experiments indicate that where both flutes extend from the
base to the tip and where each flute flake cross-section is
approximately one-sixth of the preform mass (Fig. 1D), lateral edge
clamping plus tip support is mandatory to eliminate fracture
failures like that illustrated in Figure 2, A, B, C and E. When the
lateral edge clamping failed to eliminate bending of the preform or
the flute flake was too thick (Fig. 2E), either "end snipping" moved
upward from the distal end to the mid-region of the preform (Fig.
2C), or a snap break would occur (Fig. 2A, B). Flute flakes less than
full length (Fig. 2G, H) and of a cross section less than about onesixth of the total point volume, preclude the necessity for lateral
edge clamping and tip support (Fig. 2G). However, such fluted
points sometimes lack Folsom attributes.
Experiments indicate that most aboriginal Folsom points were
fluted on very precisely contoured preforms (finishing flakes
sometimes do enter the channel scar). Any prominent facial flake
scar ridges (Fig. 2D right edge) causes the flute scar to undulate,
thicken, (Fig. 2F) and widen at the ridge points. Low spots on a
preform face allow the fracture plane to rise. This, however, is a
useful technique for terminating a flute flake short of a distal tip
(Fig. 2I). That is, both faces are thinned abruptly just above tip
grinding. The preform must then be clamped in a position vertical
to the anvil to prevent tip fractures under fluting force loads.
Fracture failures (breakage) in fluting need to be better
understood. A classic but common one is the "roll-out" (Fig. 1I and
Fig. 2C) which is commonly misclassified as being a "hinged
fracture" (Fig. 1J). Roll-out fractures may be either "reverse face"
or "front face" (Fig. 1H), and are caused by diminshed downward
flaking force. They roll to the front or rear, according to the
strength ratio between the flake volume and the mass.
True hinge fractures (Fig. 1J) represent total loss of downward
flaking compression advance. This loss is caused by flute flake
snapping, platform crushing, percussor bounce, and or mass
deflection. True hinge fractures terminate on front, or dorsal,
surfaces, not on the reverse faces.
Other unrelated fluting problems that are being confused are
"step fractures" (Fig. 1G), and "snap fractures" (Fig. 1E, F). Step
fractures are continuations of the original crack tip of fracture
advance wherein the fracture plane thins a flute flake by virtue of
stepping up (Fig. 1G) prior to termination.

EXPERIMENTS ON FLUTING FOLSOM

51

Snap fractures (Fig. 1F; improperly called a step) are not
continuations of the original fracture path but are new fractures
initiating on the previously formed ventral face. The original
fracture plane terminates in the mass (Fig. 1F). The other type of
snap fracture (Fig. IE) is a "tension snap" (bending) that occurs
when a ring crack and normal fracture is not properly formed at
the striking platform. This is sometimes accompanied with the
formation of a rudimentary flute flake attached (Fig. IB), or not
attached (Fig. 2A) to the proximal end. All snap fractures start in
tension (as opposed to between tension and compression) by
forming two essentially 90° edges (Fig. IE-F). In termination, snap
fractures form one sharp concave edge and one rolled edge.
The horizontal troughs across the channel scars and thickening
waves across the flute flake ventral face (Fig. 2F) result from
volume changes in the nascent flute flake that alter the velocity of
a fracture advance. That is, "sharp-fronted" compression advance
is being intermittently altered (see prominent ridge points on Fig.
2D) to a variable front type of advance. Ripples or fine compression
rings form on the ventral faces of flakes when sharp fronted
compression advance cannot reform to create mirror smooth
fracture surfaces.
"Lipping" alone does not indicate that artifacts were fluted by
percussion or pressure or by hard or soft hammers. Lipping is
essentially absent when the ring crack splits isolated flaking
platforms (Fig. 2D-E). Lipping is prominent when the ring crack
occurs away from the impact point of the hammer or pressure tool
(Fig. 2D).
The specimen shown in Figure 2G was fluted short of the preform
length by hand-held pressure, using no tip support, edge grinding,
or clamping device. Both flutes are materially less in volume than
one-sixth the body cross-section. The preform was random flaked
with type A lineal edge retouch. The specimens illustrated in
Figure 2H-J, were done by lever pressure with tip support, edge
grinding, and using a clamping device. Each point is progressively
thinner with longer flute flakes. The replica shown in Figure 2J had
knife-sharp edges formed by the flute flakes at both the proximal
and distal ends. Following the flute flake removal, lateral edges
were retouched to form a Style C Folsom lateral edge character.
This retouch does not extend into the channel scar and is not,
visibly at least, attributable to post-fluting activities. The ridge has
been rounded off, and it is not as sharp as type A and B channel
ridges.

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In conclusion, it must be said that none of the breakage patterns
reported in this paper are exclusive to fluting industries, but are
common to all bifacing and thinning processes.

REFERENCES CITED

Crabtree, Don E.
1966 A Stoneworkers Approach to Analyzing and Replicating The
Lindenmeier Folsom. Tebiwa Vo!. 9, No. 1, pp. 3-39.
Judge, James W.
1970 Systems Analysis and the Folsom-Midland Question. Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 40-51.
Sollberger, J. B.
ms. On the Conversion of Hertzian Cones into Flakes and Blades.
Manuscript submitted to Tebiwa.

A LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: A TEST CASE
IN THE NORTH FORK RESERVOIR AREA,
WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS
PATIENCE E.

PATTERSON

ABSTRACT
A refined model of a lithic reduction sequence designed as a
classificatory method for an in-the-field indicator of site function is
described. The model was constructed using artifacts from Site 41 WM
88 located along the North Fork of the San Gabriel River in Williamson
County, Texas. Further applications of this reduction model or sequence
in the central Texas region are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
In past years there have been publications dealing with analyses
of stages of lithic artifact manufacture (Holmes 1890; Sharrock
1966; Muto 1971; Skinner 1971, and Collins 1975, to name a few).
These various litl~ic reduction sequences or models offer a suitable
framework to study what Collins (1975: 15) refers to as "the
adaptive role of lithic technology in the broader cultural context."
In short, then, this resulted in the present study, which consists of
a synthesis and application of a sequence derived from the models
of Sharrock (1966), Muto (1971) and Collins (1975). These
utilized and refined for the analysis of materials recovered
result of the intensive archeological survey in the North
Reservoir area, Williamson County, Texas, in the summer of

were
as a
Fork
1976.

A classificatory method was needed as an in-field indicator of site
function. To this end, in this report, the application of this refined
model as both an analytical and a heuristic device is used to aid
the archeologist in making in-field judgments regarding a site’s
function.

Location and Environment of the Study Area
An archeological survey of portions of the North Fork of the San
Gabriel River area in Williamson County, Texas (Fig. 1), was
conducted by the Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, under terms of an agreement with the National Park
Service Interagency Archeological Service, Denver. The survey took
place during May and June, 1976.
The study area lies on both sides of the North Fork of the San
Gabriel River, bounded on the west by the "Fourth Crossing",

i

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which is 2.9 miles downstream east-southeast of U.S. Highway 183.
The eastern boundary lies approximately 2 miles west-northwest of
Georgetown, Texas. The north and south boundaries of the
reconnaissance area are defined by the 850-foot contour level in
the proposed reservoir area, or the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
boundary lines of the reservoir property. The study covers an area
of approximately 3,200 surface acres.

Edwards

Crass

(~

Past

Timbers

Oak

(~ Blackland

RES

Plateau

\

and

Prairies

Savannah

Prairies

1976

FIGURE 1. Locations of North Fork and Granger reservoirs including
the regional vegetation zones.

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

55

The reconnaissance area is just west of the Balcones
Escarpment, which divides the Comanche Plateau from the Coastal
Plain (Fenneman 1931: 50-58}. Local relief is well pronounced along
valley walls ranging from steep slopes to vertical cliffs. The
streambed is at an approximate elevation of 700 feet above mean
sea level, while the elevations on the rim of the valley rise from 750
feet to 900 feet above mean sea level. The upper reaches of the
reservoir exhibit a fairly broad floodplain; closer to the centerline
of the dam the relief is somewhat more pronounced with steeper
valley walls and less area of floodplain.
The soils are dark colored calcareous clays or sandy loams over
a limestone base, with many exposed areas of limestone (Sellards,
Adkins and Plummer 1932: 344, 346; and Godfrey, McKee and
Oakes 1973}. Much of the region is characterized by stoney soils
where the bedrock has weathered and the remaining durable
quartz and flint have mixed with the soil matrix.
The survey area is included within the Balconian biotic province
as defined by Blair (1950: 112-115}. The area represents an ecotone
of three vegetational zones: Cross Timbers and Prairies, the
Edwards Plateau, and the Blackland Prairie (Fig. 1A}. Thus the
vegetation is a mosaic of taxa, many of them common to all three
zones (Bryant and Dering n.d.). There are three generalized
regional variations which can be identified. These regional
variations are the Upland, Lowland and Riparian. The Upland
region is characterized by an understory of predominantly native
grasses, brushy plants and immature junipers and oak. The
overstory is predominantly juniper and oak. The Lowland region
has a thick growth of mesic vegetation. The overstory contains
thick growths of trees and shrubs and cleared areas contain tall
grasses with occasional trees. The understory includes much the
same flora as the Uplands region. The Riparian region is distinctive
and usually is confined to the banks of the drainages of permanent
waterways. Large trees such as sycamores, cedar, elm, and black
walnut are abundant. The understory includes grasses, composites
and numerous herbaceous taxa in the shaded areas (Bryant and
Dering 1976}. There are 57 species of animals known to the area;
for a discussion of the fauna see Blair (1950: 113-115}.

Previous Investigations
The reconnaissance area is in central Texas, which is an
arbitrary geographical unit employed in the archeological study of
the prehistory of Texas (Suhm 1960: 63-107).

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Prior to the 1976 field reconnaissance of the North Fork area
there have been sporadic archeological investigations of a testing
and survey nature. The first field reconnaissance was conducted in
1963 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (TASP), under the
direction of Harry I. Shafer and lames E. Corbin; it was a
preliminary survey of the areas to be affected by the proposed
North Fork Reservoir (Shafer and Corbin 1965}. In 1967, the TASP
began excavations at two sites, the John Ischy Site (41 WM 49) and
the Barker Site (41 WM 71). This was a direct result of
recommendations by Shafer’s and Corbin’s work in 1963. Although
published much later (Sorrow 1973), in 1968 further test
excavations were undertaken by TASP at eight sites within the
North Fork Reservoir area by W. M. Sorrow: 41 WM 33, WM 34,
WM 56, WM 57, WM 73, WM 87, WM 88, and WM 115. Sorrow’s
Ischy Site report was published in 1969 and the Barker Site report
in 1970. In 1970 Sorrow carried out further examination of the
area for TASP. Additional sites were identified during this latest
survey period with some testing being conducted. In 1974, Marsha
F. Jackson, representing TAS (changed from TASP to Texas
Archeological Survey in 1973}, reexamined and assessed some of
the previous documented sites and conducted a reconnaissance of
some areas which were previously inaccessible (Jackson 1974).
Chronological Constructs
Chronological constructs for central Texas have long been in
existence and have undergone constant modification through the
years (see Weir 1976 for an exhaustive historical perspective;
Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press}. Weir (1976: 9-10} points out
two important events: (1) J. Charles Kelly’s (1947a, 1947b, 1959}
attempt to group central Texas archeological materials {primarily
projectile points} into units according to the Midwestern Taxonomic
System (McKern 1939), which brought about the term Edwards
Plateau Aspect, and (2) the publication of An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology, by Suhm, Kreiger and lelks (1954)
in which various interpretations of Texas archeology were brought
together in a single volume. In the Handbook, projectile points and
ceramics of the state were classified into a spectrum of types, most
of which are still in use today as the primary "fossil indicators" or
index markers of cultural components (Weir 1976: 10). The
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions (Suhm and Jelks
1962), revised from 1954, is undoubtedly the most widely used
source for temporal placement of artifacts; however, more current
evidence has been found and further modification of the chronology

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

57

of central Texas has taken place. Briefly considered later in this
report, and illustrated in Table 1, is the latest chronological
construct for the central Texas region (adapted from Weir 1976;
Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press). In 1962, Johnson, Suhm and
Tunnell distinguished Early, Middle, Late, and Transitional Archaic
Periods within Kelly’s Edwards Plateau Aspect. This formulation
too was based primarily on projectile point variations. In 1967
Johnson presented a construct which again utilized projectile points
as time markers. Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross (1967} developed a
temporal scheme based on projectile points which was expressed in
terms of local and occupational phases. Weir {1976: 13-14}
concludes that the periods constructed so far have been considered
ends in themselves and have not explained the prehistoric cultural
events. Accordingly, Weir {1976} offers a redefinition and division
of the Archaic in his The Central Texas Archaic. Weir’s five phase
designations of the Archaic, along with the "Circleville" phase
added by Prewitt (in press} make up the chronological construct
(Table 1) used here for the North Fork Reservoir and surrounding
areas. Weir follows the terminology of Willey and Phillips (1958:
22} in regarding a phase as:
¯ . . an archeological unit possessing traits sufficiently characteristic to
distinguish it from all other units, similarly conceived, whether of the
same or other cultures or civilizations, spatially limited to the order of
magnitude of a locality or region chronologically limited to a relatively
brief interval of time.

Weir’s phases of the Archaic correspond to intervals of stability
and change. His {Weir 1976: 5} construct of the central Texas
Archaic is seen through, "... a simplistic model of cultural change
-- dissemination to coalescence to proliferation." Weir (1976: 5-7}
utilizes Maruyama’s (1963: 164-179} ideas of cybernetics or systems
research and Birdsell’s {1968: 229-240) equilibrium systems to
investigate and explain the interrelated subsystems that regulated
stability and change during the Archaic.
As yet no manifestations of Prewitt’s Circleville phase have been
discovered in the North Fork area, but they occur in the nearby
Granger Lake Reservoir area (see Fig. 1A; Prewitt 1974: 135-147}.
No terrace sites in the North Fork area have been extensively
excavated; thus the absence of cultural remains relating to the
Circleville phase may be apparent rather than real.
Given the surficial nature of the surveys and the cursory
subsurface investigations at some sites within the North Fork area,
good primary context for the diagnostic projectile points is often

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

,,,,

,,,~,

,~

.....

,,,,,,

,,,~

o

O

o

o

,4

o

o
;]

c~

oo
~o

oo
oo
~0o

o~

o~

o~
oo
oo
coo

oo
oo
oo

oo
oo
oo

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

59

lacking. Table 1 illustrates artifact provenience and frequency of
occurrence according to the dated phase designations and their
associated index markers or projectile point types. Sites 41 WM 49,
WM 57, and WM 88 are burned rock middens with the majority of
their apparent cultural associations (e.g., index markers, other
artifacts and debris) in the Round Rock and San Marcos phases,
and some associations with the later Twin Sisters phase. The
majority of the sites noted in Table 1 are classed within these same
phases. However, at least one site, the Barker Site (41 WM 71), is
known to have later cultural associations of types of arrow points
of the Cliffton and Perdiz varieties and ceramics (see Sorrow 1970).
Weir (1976: 139) summarizes the Archaic by stating,
In the three part model for the Central Texas Archaic -- dissemination/coalescence/proliferation -- I visualize groups of people widely
dispersed over central Texas at the beginning of the Archaic, coalescing
into a cultural continuum (the Round Rock Phase), followed by proliferation
of different cultural groups over most of Texas and especially the area of
the Edwards Plateau.

The clustering of index markers on the Round Rock and San
Marcos phases would seem to substantiate Weir’s overall
projection of his model of dissemination/coalescence/proliferation
(1976: 139; see also his discussion of Birdsell’s equilibrium systems
and Maruyama’s cybernetics, 1976: 5-7). This idea of a coalescence
into a cultural continuum must be a qualified and tentative
conclusion because of the nature of the sampling of sites in the
North Fork area.

METHODOLOGY
As far back as 1890, lithic technology has been conceived of as a
stage or step-like production process. W. H. Holmes (1890) used the
term "blank" to refer to the first stage or form from which final
products are derived. Bryan (1939, 1950) took exception to Holmes’
work in many respects. However, Bryan (1939: 37) comes to the
conclusion in his analysis of the lithics near Cerro Pedernal, in
New Mexico, that, "the forms having the aspect of greatest
antiquity are merely stages in the fabrication of some modern
types."
In the logical progression of events regarding the manufacture of
lithic tools it is first necessary for man to have a knowledge of his
environment and what his utilization of that environment entails.
He must have prior knowledge of making and using stone tools and
must be familiar with what qualities particular kinds of stone have

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which would suit his purposes {Spier 1970:3 and Clark 1952: 173}.
He must be knowledgeable as to the location and the method of
acquisition of the available lithic resources. The selection of the
proper core or nodule of stone {flint} also requires that the artisan
have an idea of his end result. This "mental template", according
to Deetz [1967: 43-49} dictates the form of artifacts. Through each
stage of an artifact’s production this culturally dictated idea is
foremost in the artificer’s mind {see Kroeber 1963: 103}. Variations
from the ideal are acceptable and recognized to some extent (Deetz
1967: 45). Since, as Deetz points out, lithic technology is a
subtractive process in which the reduction of a mass results in an
artifact, variations have a higher probability of occurring and
being acceptable than variations in an additive process such as
pottery making. A potter when making a mistake need only redo or
adjust his malleable clay to fit his mental image of the final
product. Thus, as a mechanical or technical failure the lithic reject
becomes a part of the archeological context as viewed by the
archeologist, whereas the corrected mistake on a ceramic vessel is
obliterated. The failures can become "fossilized" stages along the
continuum of lithic production, and if viewed and analyzed along
with other materials from the proper perspective can permit
meaningful inference regarding cultural processes.
A variety of cultural variables can come into play which will
dictate the outcome of the lithic process. The needs and desires,
skills and knowledge of the artisan are some of the variables which
through any particular culture direct the process utilized and the
ultimate archeological context of the lithic artifact. Ultimately, the
archeologist is dependent upon the results of behavior, as we deal
only with the objectifications of culture {Taylor 1973: 111}.
Before discussing the lithic reduction sequence it would do
well to point out that two different kinds of types are distinguished
and utilized in the classification of artifacts in archeology [Rouse
1960: 313-323). Rouse refers to "descriptive" types and
"historical" types. Julian Steward [1954} would designate those
types as "morphological" and "historical-index". Both Rouse’s and
Steward’s terms, descriptive and morphological, refer to types that
are based on form, physical or external properties. The second
type is the historical or historical-index; these are formed in order
to establish differences in time and space {see Rouse 1960: 318;
and Steward 1954: 54}. There may be some overlapping of the two
kinds of types, but they may be distinct because the modes
comprising each will have been chosen with significance relative to
special problems. This distinction applies specifically to lithic

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

61

typologies utilized in central Texas archeology and the materials
that have been dealt with in the North Fork area in particular. In
establishing a chronology for central Texas, historical types have
been created and utilized [see Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954;
Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962; Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross 1967;
Weir 1976; Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press). The descriptive or
morphological types are used also (see Prewitt 1974: 82-108;
Sorrow 1973: 83-104; Sorrow 1969:26-43 and Jackson 1974: 18-43).
Describing and temporally localizing the material results of
behavior does not, however, tell us anything of the broader cultural
context. In order to ascertain these contexts the archeologist has
three sets of attributes on which to base studies: [1) spatial
relationships, (2) quantity, and (3) chemico-physical specifications
[Taylor 1973: 143}. The affinities existing between the cultural
remains and the environment are paramount in making inferences
regarding cultural processes. A functional conception of type would
also serve to bring processual inferences to fruition [Steward 1954:
55-57).
In discussing the lithic reduction sequence utilized as a
processual typological tool, five stages or artifact groups are
recognized (Fig. 2): [1) core biface or flake; (2) thick biface (blank)
or trimmed flake; {3) thinned biface [blank); [4) thinned biface with
form [preform); and (5) final product. The production of lithic
utensils should, however, be viewed as a continuum. As Collins
[1975: 16) points out, the stages or steps along the continuum are
not sharply delineated from one another but are distinct enough to
merit separation, thereby identifying certain manufacturing
processes. Within this system there are certain optional steps such
as trimming, shaping, rejuvenation, or even utilization as an option
at any given point on the continuum. In reaching each of the five
stages on the continuum it is necessary to utilize a mode of
reduction. Each stage is generally the precursor to the next stage
in the reduction sequence. Manufacturing processes required to
reach the stages in the lithic sequence are trimming, shaping, and
thinning.
As previously mentioned, one important aspect of the production
of lithic utensils is the human error factor, miscalculation, or what
is termed "technological failure". Many lithic specimens which
have been assigned to type categories and elevated to the status of
finished implements, are no more than early stages in the
manufacturing process of other "typed" implements as Muto [1971:
1) has pointed out. Some collections when inspected will show a
remarkable number of artifacts whose typological categories

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

p~ODUC+~
BL~AC~

USE
/

FIGURE 2. Lithic model or reduction sequence.

should include "technological failures" within the early stages of
production (Prewitt 1974; Shafer and Corbin 1965; Sorrow 1969;
and J.W. Edwards Collection and Notes, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), n.d.). Within the options available to
the artisan the "failure" may be utilized as is, modified and
recycled, or discarded, then it becomes part of the unused lithic
debitage which remains as a part of the archeological context.
The Artifacts
The archeological study of the North Fork area and the central
Texas region is accomplished partly by investigating and explaining
the artifactual remains. Stone endures where organic materials
such as bone, shell and vegetal matter are claimed by the usually
high alkalic soils and humid environment of central Texas in
general and the North Fork area specifically. The sites are
afforded little or no protection against the elements. For these
reasons, lithic artifacts are practically the only source of evidence
we have with which to observe the prehistoric era of North Fork.
However, man being a very adaptive creature will exploit all
available resources for his subsistence and comfort. Assuming that
perishable items were an integral part of the technology, we can
make only predictive statements concerning the possible use of

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

63

artifacts of a perishable nature. Bone and shell often times remain
but these occurrences are minute relative to the lithic assemblage.
The lithic reduction model or sequence, described previously,
was applied to a collection from a test excavation carried out at
site 41 WM 88 {in 1968), a burned rock midden located on the
south side of the North Fork, approximately 3 miles upstream east
of the dam centerline. The sequence or model was first applied to
the existing collection to test the feasibility.
Only a small portion of the actual lithic material was intensively
used in this report. Those items utilized were the bifacial artifacts
relevant to testing the model and those implements determined to
have been taken out of the continuum of reduction through the
option of utilization. The largest proportion (93%) of the total
collection was comprised of the manufacturing debris and debitage.
These were originally divided into primary, secondary, and interior
flakes. As one might suspect, the primary flakes were smallest in
percentage {2%), with the secondary flakes at 12%, and the
interior flakes forming 86% of the total number of flakes. The
presence of lithic debitage and the stages of lithic production
suggest that the inhabitants of the site were manufacturing lithic
utensils. The low percentage of primary flakes quoted above are
meaningful in light of the nature of the flint found in the area, i.e.,
more nodular or tabular flint is found than cobble flint. Tabular
and nodular flint have less occurrence of cortex than does cobble
flint {Harry I. Shafer personal communication). Thus, the total
continuum of tithic reduction could be taking place at the site, even
with low percentages of cortex or primary flakes.
Tools. These artifacts are the utilized objects resulting from
reduction. In the case of the large unifacial tools the first stage
was reached and either the flake or the core was removed from
further reduction by the maker’s choice to utilize it as it was.
Further retouch or other specific strategies such as a steep bevel
were possibly performed in order to reach the desired utensil. It is
also possible that no further work was performed at all but the
artifact was simply utilized as it was. As seen in Figure 2, the
strategy or linear progression is diverted from the reduction
process directly into the optional "use" category. Also in this
category are those tools which were products of the reduction, that
is, smaller flakes or debitage which were used to perform scraping
or cutting functions (Figs. 3 and 4). The 16 tools considered to be
removed from the lithic reduction continuum at the first or second
stage have the following characteristics: [1) pronounced bulbs of
percussion, (2) compression rings of various magnitude, (3} cortex

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

on the dorsal surface or platform area, (4) signs of use and some
retouch on at least one edge or surface (Figs. 3 and 4). One artifact
(Fig. 4b) is a primary flake with cortex on the dorsal surface and
steep beveling along the lower and lateral edges of the artifact. In
the illustrations, the artifacts are oriented with the direction of
force from the bottom of the figures and the bulb of percussion,
where it is discernable, at the base of the photographs. The palmsized unifacial tool illustrated in Fig. 4b has a thickness of 2.2
centimeters and is 7.0 centimeters in width. The artifact shown in
Figure 4a is a fist-sized piece of tabular flint with remains of
cortex on both the dorsal and ventral surfaces. Flakes have been
knocked off bifacially, one side is beveled and shows wear along
the edge. The flake scars on the tool are bi-directional, some traces
of negative bulb scars are seen on the ventral surface of the
artifact (Fig. 4a).
FIGURE

FIGURE 3. Tools -- Optional strategies in reduction.

3

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

65

Many of these tools have prominent bulbs of percussion which
indicate the use of a hard hammer with a direct freehand
)ercussion method (Crabtree 1972: 11-12}.
FIGURE

FIGURE 4. Tools

-- Optional strategies in reduction.

4

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unifacial tools comprise, for the most part, the major category of
tools with the exception of the Stage 5 artifacts or final products
which are dart points. There is a wide variety of shape and size
(Fig. 5). Most are irregularly shaped unifacial tools with some
possibly functioning as cutting-scraping tools. Although generally
unifacial, slight use is seen on opposing faces of some tools. Other
utensils exhibiting steeper bits (Fig. 6) appear to have a stepped
series of tiny chip scars extending over the dorsal surfaces of the
tools. Wilmsen (1968: 159) suggests that these manifestations are
the result of heavy pressured drawing of the implement (in the
fashion of an adze or plane) over a tough unyielding surface such
as wood or bone. Another use inferred by Wilmsen (1970: 70) is
tool back blunting. In Figure 6a the steeply beveled lateral edge
(83° edge angle) on the dorsal surface of the tool opposes the
ventral surface working edge (62° edge angle). It is possible that
the steeper beveled edge was utilized as a heavy duty tool as well
as a back blunted edge for the opposing working edge. Through
Wilmsen’s (1970: 71) inferences this toot (Fig. 6a) could have been
utilized in wood working, bone working, heavy cutting or shredding
and tool back blunting. Semenov (1964: 83-142) and Wilmsen (1968
and 1970) assign functional connotations to wear patterns and edge
angles exhibited on tools. If this is the case the functions of the
majority of the tools at 41 WM 88 could be assigned to skinning
and hide scraping, sinew and plant-fiber shredding, heavy cutting
(bone, wood, or horn) and tool back blunting. The more acute edges
of tools (edge angles of 26° to 35°, according to Wilmsen (1970: 7071) and Semenov (1964: 20), infer cutting operations. However, an
important consideration in this is the availability of the lithic
resource. If the resource base is minimal or some distance away
tools are more likely to get maximum use and retouch. Conservative
strategies of recycling, retouch and modification are utilized to get
the most out of the lithic utensil. Definite usage and wear patterns,
such as polish and/or striations, will be readily apparent
throughout an assemblage. Should the resource base be abundant
and easily obtainable less conservative strategies of use and
retouch could be employed. Thus the tool assemblage recovered
might show wear and/or usage, but only to a slight degree, wherein
function could only be postulated within broad limits and not
definitively stated. The strategy of maximum use of the lithic
resource and minimal retouch or modification of utensils seems to
apply in the North Fork area. Frison (1968: 149-155) suggested that
there was a maximization of tool use to a high degree in his Piney
Creek, Wyoming material. Data on the availability of lithic

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

67

resources was not discussed, making comparisons with the North
Fork material difficult.

FIGURE

o

1

2

5

cm

FIGURE 5. Unifacial tools from 41 WM 88.

5

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

68

FIGURE

0

1

2

5

cm

C

FIGURE 6. Steep beveled tools from 41 WM 88.

6

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

69

The Sequence
The lithic reduction sequence is made up of 5 stages. As
mentioned before, each successive stage is reached by a reductive
process of trimming, shaping, and thinning.
Ancillary to reaching Stage 1 of the sequence there must be an
acquisition of raw materials. The raw materials are lithic
substances {flint) having the qualities of "elasticity, homogeneity;
are cryptocrystalline, isotropic and highly siliceous" (Crabtree
1972: 4-5). The lithic materials ideally have no planes of weakness,
no inclusions that would impair conchoidal fracturing, the same
properties in all directions in the substances and are able to return
to their former state after being depressed by application of force
(Crabtree 1972: 33-71; Sememov 1964: 33).
Just as the artisan has a preconceived notion of what qualities
the raw materials must have, he also has a mental template of
what he will make from his chosen piece of flint. Then his first step
in reaching our idea of Stage 1 is to select a suitable core or
nodule of flint. The reductive processes by which Stage 1 is
reached are removal of the cortex and the initial reduction of the
mass. The artisan then has certain options open to him. He can
reject further manipulation and utilize the artifact as it is, he can
discard it completely, or he can continue to pursue the eidetic
imagery of a final product by further reducing the mass through
successive stages until it is acceptable. Inherent in this process is
the possibility of failure due to technical error or some flaw in the
material which cannot be overcome. These failures, when
identified, may occur within any of the stages of the sequence.
They should not be considered a type or category of their own, but
should be classed within the stage for which they can be identified.
Stage 1 -- Core biface or flake (Fig. 7}. This primary stage is
usually represented by a large flake or core biface. In the sample
from 41 WM 88 the artifacts measured for length had an average
of 8.31 centimeters, average width of 5.76 centimeters, and an
average thickness of 1.94 centimeters. In some instances these may
still retain evidence of cortex, but are usually bifacially reduced.
Evidence of flaking on at least one face is a criterion. Intentional
form is not necessarily introduced at this stage. In order to reach
Stage 1 the reduction process is one of a preliminary nature. The
lithic debris resulting from this reductive process can be discarded,
utilized in its present state, or if the flakes are of sufficient size
they can be saved to be further reduced to a more finalized
product (e.g., dart point, arrow point, or thin knife).

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE

7

FIGURE 7. Stage 1 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

Stage 2 -- Thick biface or trimmed flake (blank) (Fig. 8). This
stage shows bifacial working of the stone to reduce the mass,
usually in thickness. The sample from 41 WM 88 has average

71

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

measurements of length, 6.82 cm; width, 4.43 cm; and thickness,
1.69 cm. Very often at this point the artifact has a very rough
subtriangular or lanceolate form and is still thick, relative to the
finished produce. The continuation of the reductive process toward
this stage will leave a residue of lithic debitage. This debitage can,
through the options open to the artisan, be utilized as is or it can
be discarded and left as an immediate part of the archeological
context. The debitage can contain the manufacturing errors, i.e.,
those rejects which are failures due to technical error on the part
of the artificer or some imperfection in the stone which could not
be overcome. Many times it appears that rather than taking time to
work out a useful strategy for overcoming some flaw or error, it is
more expedient {depending on the availability of resources) to start
again with another piece of stone. The rejects can be identified
through their characteristic thickness {overall, or in one area
which could not be reduced} and fracture lines.
FIGURE 8

FIGURE 8. Stage 2 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stage 3 -- Thinned biface (blank) (Fig. 9). These are usually
thinned bifaces with some intentional form evident. The artifacts in
this stage are generally thinner pieces having been reduced more
in thickness than in overall size. The artifacts assigned to Stage 3
from the sample of 41 WM 88 have an average length of 9.3 cm,
average width of 5.16 cm, and an average thickness of 1.3 cm.
Once again, options are open to the artisan to discard what he will
and/or keep and utilize the debitage. Through the next stages
utilization of the debitage would be kept to only light cutting and
scraping operations most likely. This is because as reduction
proceeds the flakes become thinner and flatter; this would cause
less tensile strength in the flake. This reduction process is an ideal,
when the thinning flake hinges, runs too deep, or the artifact
breaks due to end shock, technological failures occur.

era

FIGURE 9. Stage 3 -- Lithic reduction sequence

73

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

Stage 4 -- Thinned biface with form (preform) (Fig. 10). In this
stage the artifacts, for the most part, have been thinned and a
triangular or lanceolate form is very clear. From the artifacts
measured, it was found that the average length was 7.13 cm;
average width was 3.74 cm; and the average thickness was 0.97
cm. In the sample being utilized in this paper (41 WM 88) those
artifacts assigned to Stage 4 are all rejects due to technical error
or natural imperfection. There is also the possibility of breakage
during the time the artifact is a part of the archeological context.
Here again, immediate utilization, rejection, or recycling are
options that are open to the artisan.
FIGURE

/
!

0

1

5

2

¢m

FIGURE 10. Stage 4 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

10

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stage 5 -- Final product (Fig. 11). In the last stage of the lithic
reduction sequence the artifact takes its form usually as a dart
point, or arrow point, in the case of our sample from 41 WM 88. In
the temporal context of this sample these are the forms the
archeologist expects to see, since hunting and gathering are the
major subsistence patterns given for the archeological universe in
question. In this stage it is sometimes difficult to assess whether
the final product was broken during the last stages of manufacture
or whether indeed they were finished products being utilized and
were discarded due to impact fracture. If recovered by the artisan
or owner, he could discard it, modify the artifact and recycle it, or
simply sharpen it and use it again for the same purpose if possible.
Within this last stage there are product forms typologically
organized according to Suhm and Jelks (1962). The average
measurements of length, width, and thickness include all the types
identified and unidentified. Average length was 5.57 cm; width, 3.0
cm; thickness, 0.77 cm. There are many fragments of Stage 5
artifacts in the sample which were discernable as final products
because they consisted of the bases of specific projectile points
typical to particular types. However, no measurements were taken
and they were not counted as types. Possibilities of breakage other
than impact fractures are: (1) thermal fracturing; (2) end shock or
the stone exceeding its elastic limits during production or use; and
(3) breakage after the artifact has been lost or discarded.
As there are optional strategies along the continuum to maximize
the use of the lithic resource there are those strategies which tend
to conserve the resource during production. Due to the flint (the
artifact) lacking enough mass to withstand the stress, certain
strategies, or progressions of reduction are employed to keep the
final product intact. It is possible that there are particular
reduction strategies for specific projectile point types. Evidence of
this for Pedernales points is particularly interesting. Specific
strategies for Pedernales points occur in the fourth and fifth stages
of production.
According
to
Harry
J.
Shafer
(personal
communication) this process involves first reducing and shaping the
base before other final trimming and thinning processes continue.
This is accomplished so that end shock or amputation does not
occur when thinning the base. This stress needs a greater mass in
the blade to withstand the force. First, flute-like thinning flakes are
removed from the base, then lateral flakes are removed from the
base. Finally, the blade portion of the point is thinned by removing
flakes from the edges. This reduction strategy occurs on many
Pedernales points in the J.W. Edwards Collection (TARL). The

75

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

process of this strategy is illustrated by both the technological
failures as well as the flake scars on final products.
FIGURE 11
,t

0

1

5

2

am

/
!

f

\

FIGURE 11. Stage 5 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

\\

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The major thrust of this report has been the application of a
lithic reduction sequence as an analytical tool in the analysis of a
collection of lithic materials from site 41 WM 88 in the North Fork
Reservoir area, Williamson County, Texas. The sequence is a
synthesis of models utilized by Sharrock (1966), Muto (1971), and
Collins (1975) and has been refined to assist archeologists in
making judgments in the field regarding site function.
With the exception of a very few artifacts, the collection from 41
~NM 88 is made up of materials available in the immediate vicinity.
The lithic resource base was in such abundance as to negate any
sort of conservative strategies in utilization. Short term tool use is
apparent: wear traits such as polish, scratches, and crushing are
minimal. The unfinished artifacts throughout the lithic reduction
sequence, and the amount of debitage, support the assumption that
stone working was carried on at 41 WM 88. The preponderance of
projectile points -- intact artifacts, fragmented specimens, and
some reworked points -- indicates that hunting was routine. With
this comes the assumption that meat and hide processing were
being carried on at the site. Following the criteria set forward by
Semenov (1964: 20, 83-142) and Wilmsen (1970: 70-71), the edge
angles on many of the implements from 41 WM 88 imply functions
of this nature. Plant and fiber processing are inferences which also
can be posited due to the steep beveled tools present in the
collection. The grinding stones recovered suggest that seeds and
nuts as well as other edible plants were being processed and
consumed.
The range of projectile point types found indicates that the site
was inhabited in more than one particular era or time span. The
manufacturing of so many bifaces as well as other tools, and their
subsequent discarding, reflects the abundant local raw material
and seems to imply that the inhabitants were very mobile, utilizing
the chosen resources within their geographical range and not
carrying artifacts from place to place.
Subsistence strategies of hunters and gatherers according to Lee
(1968: 41) generally tend to rely on the most accessible and
dependable resource first, then strategies turn to alternative means
of subsistence. To illustrate the above, generalizations of hunters
and gatherers and their subsistence strategies have been taken
from ethnographic situations over the world. Lee (1968: 41) states
that,

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

77

The general view offered here is that gathering activities, for plants and
shellfish, should be the most productive of food for hunting and
gathering man, followed by fishing, where the source is available. The
hunting of mammals is the least reliable source of food and should be
generally less important than either gathering or fishing.

This importance or priority is a matter of basic subsistence; it is
not particularly a social priority. However, Lee (1968: 41} states
that there is a desire "to enjoy the rewards, both social and
nutritional, afforded by the killing of game."
The dynamics of environment and prehistoric technology in the
North Fork area and central Texas in general are such that it is
reasonable to assume that 41 WM 88, and other sites in the area,
were inhabited on a seasonal basis. However, no studies along
these lines have been conducted in the North Fork area
specifically. I am not aware of any studies which address
themselves to this question for the central Texas region in general.
Acquiring food in a natural environment is a deliberative and
rational process (just as the lithic reduction processes}, one in
which choices and decision making are definitely involved (see
Tindale 1972: 217-268; Clark 1952: 7, and Jochim 1976: 4). Eddy
(1973} illustrates this in his study of the Laneport Reservoir District
which is now known as Granger Reservoir (see Fig. 1A). Locational
strategy studies, as utilized by Eddy (1973) could be well adapted
and tested in the North Fork area. Sites are known to exist in
varied topographic settings of the North Fork area which would
lend themselves to this
type
of investigation.
Although
microenvironmental zones (Coe and Flannery 1964) may well be
present, three major environmental settings are immediately
evident: {1) riverine, {2) floodplain, and (3} upland.
How the lithic technology fits in with all these variables can be
viewed better by utilizing the lithic reduction sequence coupled
with analysis of use and wear on the lithic artifacts with good
context. Such studies combined with the use of adaptations of
predictive models of hunter-gatherer subsistence and settlement
(see Jochim 1976} can greatly enhance our present knowledge of
the processes of prehistoric culture change and development.
The viability of the lithic reduction sequence as it has been
applied here to a test case in the North Fork area is effective in
that it allows the archeologist to work along a continuum that
expands from tangible lithic artifacts to the broadest cultural
inference. Other information must be integrated with the
technological data in order to achieve explanations of the cultural

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

processes of Archaic peoples and how the populations adapted
both socially and technologically to their environments. The
ultimate results of such studies of the environment on man’s
development would allow the archeologist to see the consequent
effects on the environment due to the presence of man.
The lithic reduction sequence can be a viable research tool for
central Texas as a whole. Since lithic tool kits appear to fluctuate
in specialization and intensity of use throughout the central Texas
Archaic {Weir 1976: 124-140}, then examination of the lithic
materials {preferably with good primary context} in terms of this
sequence could add to and carry further the existing data base for
central Texas.
In summary, the lithic reduction sequence utilized as an in-field
indicator of site function gives the archeologist a basis on which to
direct further investigation. However, this reduction sequence will
not stand alone as an analytical device. It must be integrated with
other forms of analysis based on all aspects of current
archeological method. Analyses of lithic technology [in terms of a
continuum of production and strategy} coupled with studies of
environmental, spatial, and socio-cultural relationships would lead
to broader cultural inferences and interpretations for the whole of
Archaic populations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to express my thanks and appreciation to those friends who
provided assistance and encouragement during the course of this
endeavor.
I would like to thank Dr. Harry I. Shafer of the Department of
Sociology and Anthropology at Texas A&M University for his helpful
criticisms and his willingness to share his ideas with me.
Drs. lames A. Neely and E. Mott Davis have been most helpful and
patient as both committee members and friends. To them, I owe a
special thank you.
During the field season at North Fork, Iohn Ippolito, Laura Hillier and
Gary Moore were able and congenial field companions. During the
preparatory phase of this study Melinda Giles and Virginia Christie took
time out from their own schedules to help me in editing and drafting; it
was much appreciated.
A very special acknowledgment goes to the Travis Family for all their
help. They have been a constant course of encouragement and aid to me
throughout many years of work and study.

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

79

REFERENCES CITED
Birdsell, Joseph E.
1968 Some Predictions for the Pleistocene System Among Recent Hunters
and Gatherers. In Man the Hunter. Richard Lee and Irven Devote,
ed., Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago. pp. 229-240.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Iournal of Science, Vol. 2,
pp. 93-117.
Bryan, Kirk
1939 Stone Cultures Near Cerro Pedernal and Their Geological
Antiquity. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 11, pp. 9-46.
1950 Flint Quarries -- The Sources of Tools and, at the same time, the
factories of the American Indian. Papers of the Peabody Museum
of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol.
XVII, No. 3.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr., and J. Phil Dering
n.d. Preliminary Overview of the Flora of North Fork Reservoir Area.
Unpublished manuscript, Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Clark, J.G.D.
1952 Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. Stanford University Press,
Stanford.
Cue, Michael D. and Kent V. Flannery
1964 Microenvironments and Mesoamerican Prehistory. Science, Vol.
143, No. 3607, pp. 650-654.
Collins, Michael B.
1975 Lithic Technology as a Means of Processual Inference. In Lithic
Technology Making and Using Stone Tools. E. Swanson, ed., Mouton
Publishers, distributed by Aldine, Chicago, pp. 15-34.
Crabtree, Don E.
1972 An Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers of the Idaho
State University Museum, No. 28, Pocatello.
Deetz, James
1967 Invitation to Archeology. The Natural History Press, Garden City.
Eddy, Frank W.
1973 Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir District Central
Texas. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931 Physiography of the western United States. McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Inc., New York.
Frison, George C.
1968 A Functional Analysis of Certain Chipped Stone Tools. American
Antiquity, Vol. 33, No. 2: 149-155.
Godfrey, C. L., G. S. McKee, and H. Oakes
1973 General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station,
Texas A&M University, in cooperation with the Soil Conservation
Service, United States Department of Agriculture.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Holmes, W. H.
1890 A Quarry Workshop of the Flaked-Stone Implement Makers in the
District of Columbia. American Anthropologist, Vol. 3, pp. 1-26.
Jackson, Marsha F.
1974 Archeological Resources of the North Fork Reservoir Area: Results
of the Survey and Testing 1970 Season. Report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Jochim, Michael A.
1976 Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlement: A Predictive Model,
Academic Press, New York.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1967 Toward A Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central
and Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 12,
Austin.
Kelly, J. Charles
1947a The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde,
and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleonthological Society, Vol. 18: pp. 115-138.
1947b The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear
Fork Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 13: pp. 97-108.
1959 The
Desert Cultures
and the Balcones Phase:
Archaic
Manifestations in the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity,
Vol. 24: pp. 276-288.
Kroeber, A. L.
1963 Anthropology: Culture Patterns and Processes. First Harbinger
Books edition. Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc., New York.
Lee, Richard B.
1968 What Do Hunters Do For a Living, or, How to Make Out on Scarce
Resources. In Man the Hunter. Richard Lee and Irven Devore,
Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago. pp. 30-48.
Maruyama, Magoroh
1963The Second Cybernetics: Deviation-Amplifying Mutual Causal
Processes. American Scientist, Vol. 51: pp. 164-179.
McKern, W. C.
1939 The Midwestern Taxanomic Method as an Aid to Archaeological
Culture Study. American Antiquity, Vol. 4: pp. 301-313.
Muto, Guy R.
1971 A Technological Analysis of the Early Stages in the Manufacture of
Lithic Artifacts. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Idaho State
University, Pocatello.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Research Report No. 49. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
1976 Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The San Marcos
and Twin Sisters Phases. In The Texas Archaic: A Symposium.
T.R. Hester ed., Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report No. 2.
n.d.The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigations. Manuscript in press.
press Research Report No. 54, Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

81

Rouse, Irving
1960 The Classification of Artifacts in Archaeology. American Antiquity,
Vol. 25: pp. 313-323.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas, Vol. I: Stratigraphy. University of Texas
Bulletin, No. 3232.
Sememov, S. A.
1964 Prehistoric Technology: An Experimental Study of the Oldest Tools
and Artefacts from Traces of Manufacture and Wear. M.W.
Thompson, trans. Branes and Noble Books, New York.
Shafer, Harry J. and James E. Corbin
1965 An Appraisal of the Archeolocal Resources of the North Fork, South
Fork, and Laneport Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project.
Sharrock, Floyd W.
1966 Prehistoric Occupation Patterns in Southwest Wyoming and Cultural
Relationships with the Great Basin and Plains Culture Area.
University of Utah Anthropological Papers, No. 77.
Skinner, S. Alan
1971 Prehistoric Settlement of the DeCordova Bend Reservoir, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42: pp. 149270.
Sorrow, W. M.
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burnt Rock
Midden in Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 18.
1970 Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Research Report, No. 1.
1973 Test Excavations in the North Fork Reservoir Area. Report submitted
to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Sharer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir, Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 11.
Spier, R. F. G.
1970 From the Hand of Man: Primitive and Preindustrial Technologies.
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
Steward, Julian
1954 Types of Types. American Anthropologist, Vol. 56: pp. 54-57.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 29: pp. 63-108.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Volume 25.
Suhm D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbooks of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin No. 4, Austin.

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
n.d.J.W. Edwards Collection and Notes. Unpublished notes on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Taylor, Walter W.
1973 A Study of Archeology. Arcturus Books Edition, Fourth Printing.
Southern Illinois University Press. Carbondale.
Tindale, Norman B.
1972 The Pitjandjara. In Hunters and Gatherers Today, M. G. Bicchieri,
ed., Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. New York. pp. 217-268.
Weir, Frank A.
1976The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
Washington State University, Pullman.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Wilmsen, Edwin N.
1968 Functional Analysis of Flaked Stone Artifacts. American Antiquity,
Vol. 33, No. 2: pp. 157-161.
1970Lithic Analysis and Cultural Inference: A Paleo-Indian Case.
Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona, No. 16, The
University of Arizona Press, Tuscon.

THE GARZA OCCUPATION AT
THE LUBBOCK LAKE SITE
EILEEN JOHNSON, VANCE

T.

HOLLIDAY, MICHAEL

J.

KACZOR

AND ROBERT STUCKENRATH

ABSTRACT
Recent excavations at the Lubbock Lake site (41 LU 1) by the Lubbock
Lake Project, The Museum of Texas Tech University, resulted in the
recovery of Garza points in association with hearths. Radiocarbon
determinations received on the charcoal dated the occupations to the
mid-1600’s. These were the first reported radiocarbon dates for this
distinctive point type. Four excavation areas yielded evidence of
repeated Garza occupation in the form of camping areas and a
processing station. In one of the excavation areas, previous work
conducted by Green (1962) was correlated with that of the excavations
of the Lubbock Lake Project. The dates and the association of Apachelike pottery [micaceous blackware) strongly suggested that Garza points
were contemporaneous with the Apache occupation of the area and that
perhaps the point type represented a local Apache style.

INTRODUCTION
The Lubbock Lake site (41 LU 1) is a stratified archeological
locality on the Llano Estacado. Situated in an old meander bend of
Yellowhouse Draw, the site is located on the northern outskirts of
the city of Lubbock, Lubbock County, Texas. Although the site has
long been recognized as a Paleo-Indian locality (Sellards 1952;
Black 1974), the deposits record a fairly continuous aboriginal
occupation from Clovis to Historic times. A faunal and geological
stratigraphy exists concomitantly with this cultural sequence,
providing a three dimensional framework for the interpretation of
cultural change in the area.
The Lubbock Lake Project is an on-going, interdisciplinary
research program of The Museum of Texas Tech University.
Although primarily concerned with the delineation of the PaleoIndian occupations and changes at the site, most of the cultural
time periods and geological substrata have been tested by the
project. The site has a minimum extent of 110 acres, and owing to
its size and the stratified nature of the deposits, many excavation
areas were opened. A variety of cultural activity areas existed
synchronically and diachronically, attesting to the differential
utilization of the site environs by various cultural groups. Within
the later deposits at the site, the most extensively explored cultural

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

occupation was that of the Garza period. This cultural designation
is based on a distinctive point type, that of a small, triangularshaped point with a single, centrally placed, basal notch (Runkles
1964: 107). Several sites yielding Garza points and an associated
tool assemblage had been excavated in the area (Holden 1938;
Wheat 1955; Word 1963; Runkles 1964; Parsons 1967; Lorrain
1968), and surface collections indicated a distribution from the
Llano Estacado into southeastern New Mexico (Runkles 1964: 124).
No radiocarbon dates were associated with the material from these
sites, but the suggested time period of Garza occupation in the area
was late prehistoric (Runkles 1964: 123). Radiocarbon determinations received on charcoal from hearths associated with Garza
points at the Lubbock Lake site suggest a protohistoric/historic
occupation by this cultural group.

OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
Garza period occupational features were found at four excavation areas at the site, Area 5, 8, 14, and 15 (Fig. 1). These features
represent two different kinds of cultural activity, camping areas
and processing stations. Camping areas, where people lived for a
short period of time, were located in Area 8, 14, and 15. These
areas are characterized by the occurrence of hearths, widespread
scatter of lithic tools, unfinished items, and debris, and the absence
of bone expediency (butchering) tools. One processing station was
partially exposed in Area 5. Secondary butchering and marrow
extraction took place in these stations, the kill and primary
butchering occurring elsewhere. Processing stations are characterized by the presence of butchered remains of several kinds of game
animals, a random bone disposal pattern, marked absence of
various major skeletal elements, and the occurrence of bone
expediency tools. These two kinds of cultural activity areas are
also differentiated by their topographic locations. The camping
areas were located in the dry, upland sections away from the main
watercourse. Processing stations were located in the lowland areas
along the marsh/stream complex. The geologic deposits reflect this
topographic difference. The Garza camping areas occurred in
substratum 5A1, an aeolian/fluvial sand and colluvium deposit;
while the processing stations occurred in 5C1, the lowland clay
facies (Stafford 1977).

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

85

/
\
’\\\

/

r~
©

0

©
r~
©

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Activity Areas
Area 14-FA14-1 and Area 15-FA15-1 .
Of the three camping areas located, the two in Area 14 and 15
were found through stratigraphic testing that revealed the
presence of hearths. In each of these excavation areas, only the
hearth and immediately adjacent occupation surface were
excavated, an expeditious technique designed to recover material
for radiocarbon dating.
An unlined, basin-shaped hearth, feature FA14-1, was exposed in
Area 14. Excavations revealed a Ethic scatter beginning 10 cm
above the hearth and extending down into it. A unifacially flaked
Garza point made of Edwards Plateau chert was recovered in situ
10 cm above the hearth. The broken tip exhibits several hinge
fractures from impact. A biface corner section of Edwards Plateau
chert was recovered and may have been broken in manufacturing
since only a few parallel flakes were removed from each side.
There is no noticeable wear along the edge of this specimen. Two
utilized flakes of Edwards Plateau chert were recovered. One
exhibits damage flake scars along both sides, but particularly along
the medial edge. The other specimen was broken but retains an
edge showing damage flake scars. Seventy-five unmodified flakes
were recovered, the most common material being Edwards Plateau
chert (59). Other materials used included Tecovas (9) and Alibates
(3) cherts, silicified caliche (3), and obsidian (1). Charcoal,
submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory of the Smithsonian
Institution, yielded a date of A.D. 1635 (315+ 50; SI-2701). The
hearth in Area 15 (FA15-1) is more appropriately described as an
ash-filled, kettle-shaped pit (Fig. 2). Hearth material, including
burned caliche, burned and unburned bone, and charcoal, had
been dumped into the pit. One Garza point of Edwards Plateau
chert came from the lowest level in the pit. The tip was broken,
showing a burin-like break that had occurred on impact. Charcoal
from this lowest level yielded a date of A.D. 1665 (285 _+ 60; SI2703).
Area 8-FA8-2, FA8-4
Evidence of repeated, intensive occupation by Garza period
peoples came from Area 8, where at least two, and perhaps as
many as four, levels of habitation were found. Green (1962) had
opened a long trench in this area, dividing it into four excavation
units, Block A, B, C, and X. A minimal amount of testing was

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

87

!
.2,

;i

¢3
"UJ
©
OD

¢J
b.l

t9

i i i i )i i i i i i

U3

iiiiiiiiiiiii
iiii~iii~iiiii

i i !i !i!i!!!!

<D

¢J
(D

64
c~

tO

cD

D

~

2

E

o

u.

o

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

conducted in this area by the Lubbock Lake Project to correlate
stratigraphy and obtain additional data on the various occupation
levels. Green’s (1962) stratigraphic sequence in this area was
compressed and redefined by Stafford (1977). Within his stratum 6,
now designated substratum 5A by the Lubbock Lake Project, Green
(1962: 119) exposed two living surfaces, calling the higher one the
first occupation level and the other the second occupation level.
These levels corresponded to features FA8-2 and FA8-4,
respectively, uncovered by the Lubbock Lake Project (Fig. 3). Two
other occupation levels were encountered by the project within the
5A deposits, one above and one below the Garza levels. No
diagnostic artifacts were recovered, and their cultural affiliations
are unknown at present. These features may represent Garza
occupations as well since the total deposition of 5A occurred over
a short period of time (Stafford 1977).
FA8-2
Green (1962) recovered a variety of tools and exposed several
micro-activity areas in both occupation levels. The predominant
lithic material source was Edwards Plateau chert; a few other
types of material were minimally represented. Three projectile
points were recovered from the first occupation level: a broken
Garza point made of Tecovas chert (Fig. 4g); a basal tang of a
"Lott" point, a locally known, informally named point; and the
blade of an indeterminate type (Fig. 4f). "Lott" points were
associated with Garza points in the upper two occupation levels at
Blue Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938) and at the Pete Creek
site (Parsons 1967). Other tools from the first occupation level
include an ovate, bifacially flaked, preform of Edwards Plateau
chert (Fig. 4c), and six scrapers, all of Edwards Plateau chert and
all made on flakes. Three of the scrapers were small, delicate tools
perhaps used as finishing implements. Minute damage flake scars
can be seen along the working edges. One has retouch along both
sides; the second example was broken, but has steep retouch along
the two unbroken edges. The third scraper is alternately retouched
along the sides. Retouch along the lateral edge is on the dorsal
side, while the medial edge retouch occurs on the ventral side (Fig.
4j,k,1). Another scraper exhibits alternate retouch at the distal
corners, on the dorsal side at the medial edge, and on the ventral
side of the lateral edge (Fig. 4h). A snub-nosed scraper has steep
retouch on three sides with heavy damage flake scarring along the
edges, particularly the distal end (Fig. 4b). The last scraper was a

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

89

E

o

.£
Z
o

/ .....

o
O~

o

/

©

o
o

©

5

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

broken section, showing some damage flake scarring superimposed
on the retouch of the working edge (Fig. 4i).

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

91

Fifteen utilized flakes were recovered, the majority of which
were of Edwards Plateau chert. Four of them have either
indentations that were used or notches created through damage
flake scarring. Of the others, three show damage flake scaring
along the lateral edge (one on the ventral side); two exhibit use
along the medial edge (one on the ventral side); and two are utilized
on the distal end and one at the latero-distal corner. The apex of a
triangular-shaped flake has been utilized. The remaining utilized
items are broken pieces exhibiting damage flake scars along single
edges.
At least one chipping station was exposed, represented by a
small cluster of flakes located along the Block A/B line. The
majority of unmodified flakes, including retouch and resharpening
debitage from the chipping station, were of Edwards Plateau chert.
Other materials (Alibates chert, chalcedony, Morrison quartzite,
and a white chert of unknown source) were represented by only a
few flakes each. A hearth, with several large chunks of burned
caliche, was located in Block A (Fig. 3), but a radiocarbon
determination was not reported.
In addition to the lithic material, parts of two tubular bone beads
were recovered (Fig. 4a). Similar beads were found at other
excavated Garza sites (Holden 1938; Wheat 1955; Runkles 1964).
Pottery sherds from the level consisted of a thick-walled, brushed,
grit-tempered blackware (Fig. 4e). This is an unnamed pottery type
that has occurred at other sites (surface collections) in the area
and may be of local origin.
Although no Garza points were recovered from the project’s
testing operations in Area 8, feature FA8-2 was correlated with
Green’s (1962) first occupation level (Fig. 3). Six additional utilized
flakes, a small core, a biface, pottery, and the edge of another
chipping station were exposed in a 1 x 2 meter test unit adjacent to
Block C. The flaking on the ventral side of the tip of the biface was
incomplete, having been broken during manufacturing (Fig. 4m).
The material used was Edwards Plateau chert. A unidirectional
core was made on a very small nodule of Edwards Plateau chert
(Fig. 4d). Two of the utilized flakes (Edwards Plateau chert) were
notched along the lateral side, one taking advantage of an
indentation and the other creating a shallow notch from damage
flake scarring. The other four flakes exhibit a variety of utilization
indications. One flake (Edwards Plateau chert) was utilized along
the distal end and on the ventral side of the medio-distal corner;
while a second flake (Edwards Plateau chert) exhibits wear along
the distal end. Two obsidian flakes were utilized, one along the

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

distal and lateral edges, the other along the medial edge on the
ventral side.
Two hundred fifty-five flakes of retouch/resharpening debitage
were recovered from the partially exposed chipping station.
Ranging in size from less than 2 mm to 19 ram, most of the flakes
were located in situ; the rest were recovered from matrix
concentrates. Edwards Plateau chert was the preponderant lithic
source (71%), followed distantly by a white chert of unknown
source (22%). Other materials (chalcedony, obsidian, and silicified
caliche) made up the remainder {7%). The use of five different
lithic materials indicates the manufacture or use of a variety of
implements (at least five).
Pottery sherds recovered were an unbrushed, thick-walled, grittempered blackware. Similar sherds were recovered in surface
collections from the area, from the uppermost Garza occupation at
Blue Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), and the Garza
occupation at the Floydada Country Club site (Word 1963). These
sherds probably represent either a contemporaneous type or
unbrushed portions of brushed ware. Neither Wheat (1955) nor
Runkles (1964) recovered pottery in association with Garza
material.
Food debris scattered across the occupation surface consisted
principally of remains from modern bison (Bison bison), although
pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana) and wolf (Canis lupus)
also were represented. Parts of two bison mandibles were
recovered during the project’s testing efforts. One is the left
mandible of a mature animal, aged between 5.5 and 9.5 years
(Frison and Reher 1970). The ascending ramus and angle had been
removed by pounding action during butchering and the P2-M,
removed. The tooth cavity was exposed to the M3 by incomplete
spiral fracturing, removing the symphyseal surface and border
area. The breakage was completed by several blows along the
border, giving access to the marrow-rich area. The mandible could
not be measured for sexing because of this damage. The other
mandible is a right one of probably a 3.5 year old. Only the M3
remained, and it was erupted with the first two cusps in wear and
the third cusp unworn (Frison and Reher 1970). The ascending
ramus, angle, and border had been removed through pounding
action to just posterior to the Ma, probably during butchering. The
anterior section had been removed to the M3, and the mandible
could not be measured for sexing.

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

93

FA8-4
Several projectile points, all of Edwards Plateau chert, were
recovered by Green (1962) in the second (lower) Garza occupation
level. Of the five, two are midsections and one is the corner tang of
a Harrell point. Two Garza points were located in the second
occupation level. One point is a unifacially flaked basal section
with the notch bifacially flaked. The other point is incomplete and
apparently broke during manufacturing, the two sections being
recovered near each other. This Garza point has merely an
incipient basal notch, with only a few flakes removed bifacially
(Fig. 5a,b). Garza and Harrell points were found in association at
the Garza type locality (Runkles 1964), at the upper two occupation
levels at Blue Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), and at the Pete
Creek site (Parsons 1967).
The basal section of a thin, bifacially flaked knife, of Edwards
Plateau chert, also was recovered. It was apparently broken during
manufacture. The base is concave and the edges and base
demonstrate some degree of grinding (Fig. 5d).
All of the scrapers and utilized flakes were of Edwards Plateau
chert. Two side scrapers were made on flakes. One of these retains
the outer cortex of the nodule on the proximal and distal ends. This
tool has steep angle retouch along the lateral side with heavy
damage flake scarring (Fig. 5f). It was apparently broken during
use, and two sections were recovered. The other scraper is a small,
delicate tool. Steep angle retouch has created a shallow notch on
the lateral side, and tiny damage flakes were removed in the notch
area (Fig. 5g). An end scraper has steep retouch that created a
shallow scallop edge. Heavy damage flake scarring is exhibited
within the "notches" of the scallop (Fig. 5h). The fourth scraper is
a keeled, long, and narrow tool, steeply retouched on all sides (Fig.
5e). Damage flakes had been removed around the distal end and
adjacent sides, but particularly along the medial edge.
Five utilized flakes were recovered. Three have damage flake
scarring along the distal end, one along the medial edge, and one
along the lateral edge on the ventral side.
A bone awl was fashioned from a split shaft segment of a long
bone, ground and polished to a tip (Fig. 5i). The tip had been broken
during use. Awls from split sections of bone were recovered at
other excavated Garza localities (Holden 1938; Wheat 1955;
Runkles 1964; Parsons 1967).
The most unusual occurrence in this occupation level was the
exposing of a cluster of 16 bison skulls (Green 1962), extending

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

©

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

95

from Block A into Block X (Fig. 3). Although Green (1962: 119)
suggested that they may have had ritual significance, the feature
was not totally isolated; other mundane activities had occurred
around the cluster. A butchered wolf skeleton and lithic debris
were scattered to the east of the cluster. Two small chipping
stations (debris of Edwards Plateau chert) also were located in the
area, one south and the other southwest of the cluster. However,
no lithic material was recovered from the adjacent Block B to the
west of the skulls. Cultural material was located further to the
west in Block C (Fig. 3), where another hearth was located. No
radiocarbon date was reported. Burned remains of pronghorn
antelope, badger (Taxidea taxus), and western diamond-back
rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox) were recovered from the hearth.
Green’s (1962) second Garza occupation level was correlated
with FA8-4 from the project’s test unit. Most of the material from
this feature consisted of modern bison remains, concordant with
the butchered remains Green (1962) recovered in Block C (Fig. 3).
Three resharpening/retouch flakes, each of a different material
(Edwards Plateau chert, and a white chert and pink quartzite of
unknown sources), constituted the lithic material recovered. A more
detailed analysis of the material recovered by Green (1962) and
correlation with work done by the Lubbock Lake Project is
forthcoming (Kaczor ms.).
Area 5-FA5-6

The one processing station excavated by the project was located
in Area 5 and designated feature FA5-6 (Fig. 6). The station
represented an area of secondary processing, a distinctive aspect
of the animal procurement system. The "schlepp effect" concept
(Perkins and Daly 1968), whereby long bones and other major
skeletal elements were not as numerous as they should be given the
minimum number of individuals (MNI) represented, was operative
in these stations. Perkins and Daly (1968: 105) felt that this
phenomenon resulted from killing and initially butchering animals
away from the locale and bringing back only selected parts. At the
Lubbock Lake processing stations, these selected units were then
further butchered and the bones processed for marrow. Although
modern bison was the principal game animal, remains of pronghorn
antelope, wolf, and coyote (Canis latrans) also were recovered.
Faunal remains were scattered over the surface in a random
pattern; however, there was a greater concentration of faunal
material and bone expediency tools in the eastern section of the
exposed station. This area may then be close to a boundary of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

96

original station. Deposits east of the exposed station were removed
by dredging in the 1930’s and subsequent erosion. More of the
station existed south of the exposed area, demonstrated through
testing and profiling operations.

~2
©

r./]

/rI

tr3

<

32

©

5

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

97

Lithic tools and flakes were found throughout the processing
station. Parts of four projectile points were recovered. One Garza
point of Tecovas chert has the tip broken by impact creating
several hinge fractures (Fig. 7a). A Harrell point of chalcedony is
represented by a corner tang. A small basal section with a notch
(Edwards Plateau chert) is from either a Garza or Harrell point.
The fourth point consists of a broken midsection of Edwards
Plateau chert. The broken tip of a chalcedony biface was recovered
(Fig. 7b). Both edges of this possible knife show slight crushing
damage and rounding of points, although wear is heaviest along the
lateral edge. A broken unifacially flaked implement, of Edwards
Plateau chert, may have also been part of a flake knife. Damage
flake scarring is biracial, and the sinuous edge is worn and
rounded. Two scrapers of Edwards Plateau chert were found. One
is a large, snub-nosed scraper made on a thick flake (Fig. 7d). Steep
angle retouch occurs on the three sides with damage flake scarring
concentrated on the distal end. Both edges adjacent to the proximal
end, but particularly the lateral side, show edge crushing, perhaps
for hafting purposes. The other scraper was made on a blade that
had a triangular cross-section (Fig. 7c). The broken midsection of a
side scraper was collaterally flaked; damage flake scarring is
exhibited along both edges but is more pronounced along the
latero-distal one. The material may have been heat-treated as it
shows a very crystalline structure, is highly fractured internally,
and pitted. Flakes of similarly colored and structured Edwards
Plateau chert were recovered in Area 8 from Green’s (1962) upper
Garza occupation level and FA8-2. A very large chopper made on a
cobble of Potter’s chert was found lying next to a bison skull. It is
unifacially flaked with heavy damage flake scarring along the
central distal edge. Ten utilized flakes were found; most of these
are of Edwards Plateau chert. Two broken flakes demonstrate
damage flake scarring along the working edges. Three others
exhibit damage flake scars along the distal, lateral, or medial
edges. One has damage flake scarring along the lateral edge on the
ventral side; while another has been alternately utilized with
damage flake scars along the lateral edge on the dorsal side and
along the medial edge of the ventral side. Damage flakes have been
removed along the latero-distal edge of a small blade; while
another blade of Potter’s chert exhibits some damage flake removal
along both sides. An indentation along the medial edge of a flake of
Alibates chert was utilized; the "notch" also shows damage flake
scarring.

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

¢J
bl

tr~

<

¢J

E©

¢J

<

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

99

Two pieces of a broken metate were recovered. One may have
been used as a pounding stone for breaking bones open since the
broken edge has several large flakes removed and exhibits some
crushing damage. One sherd of "Apache" pottery, a thin-walled,
mica-tempered blackware, was recovered (Fig. 7@ Similar pottery
was recovered from the first Garza occupation level at Blue
Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), in the Garza occupation at
the Floydada Country Club site (Word 1963), and the Garza
occupation level at Red Bluff Shelter (Lorrain 1968). One hundred
forty-five resharpening flakes and other micro-debitage have been
recovered to date. Although 10 different kinds of lithic material are
represented, Edwards Plateau chert accounts for 73% of the
collection. A white chert of unknown source makes up 8%, while
chalcedony accounts for 6% and Tecovas chert for 4%. The
remaining 9% consists of the other six lithic sources. A variety of
colors of Edwards Plateau chert have been encountered, ranging
from blue-black to light tan. The variety of lithic sources indicates
that a minimum of 10 tools had been used in the station, although
tools from only three of the lithic categories were recovered. When
the distribution of the resharpening flakes was plotted they
clustered in several groups (Fig. 8), possibly indicating work areas.
However, not all matrix concentrates have been sorted, and
additional resharpening flakes from these concentrates could
change the distribution pattern.
s
+,

÷,

Lubbock Lake Site
41 LU 1
Feature 6,

Area 5

Distribution of Resharpening Flakes

÷,

~9~ r

FIGURE 8: Distribution of resharpening flakes from Feature 6, Area
5 -- Carza period processing station.

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Eighteen bone expediency tools were recovered among the
scatter of faunal debris. Of these, five were manufactured and 13
were utilized items. Bone expediency tools are implements that
were made "on-the-spot," generally from elements of the carcasses
being processed. After use, they were left with the rest of the
faunal debris. Manufactured tools were shaped before use; utilized
items consisted of pieces unmodified before use. Controlled
breakage (spiral fracturing) represents a major aspect of the
technology, but advantage was also taken of fortuitous breaks. The
expediency tools from the Lubbock Lake site, including those of this
processing station, were discussed in detail elsewhere (Johnson
1976). All bone tools from the station are of bison, and no one bone
was used preferentially. For the purposes of this report, only the
manufactured items will be discussed. Two of these are the broken
shafts of expediency tools, both demonstrating the removal of a
series of thinning flakes along the shaft edge for shaping. A third
tool was made from a humerus shaft segment. A number of
thinning flakes were removed along the lateral shaft edge. The
spirally fractured working edge exhibits damage flake scarring,
rounded edges, and heavy wear polish along the ventral side,
possibly from use as a scraper. Two choppers were made from the
proximal ends of metacarpals. One exhibits damage flake scarring
on all three sides of the working edge and wear polish from use.
The second is cracked and broken from heavy use. Numerous hinge
fractures and heavy wear polish on the discontinuous working edge
attest to the battering it received. These and the other expediency
tools were restricted to the eastern portion of the exposed station
where the faunal debris was more concentrated.
In addition to the possible work areas outlined by the lithic
flaking debris, another micro-activity area was exposed in a test
unit along the west wall of Area 5. A small pile composed
principally of long bones was capped by a bison skull. Numerous
resharpening flakes, most of Edwards Plateau chert, were found in
the unit. The large chopper was found in association with this bone
pile. Although several of the bones show butchering damage, few
had been processed for marrow. This bone stacking and lack of
marrow processing was in direct contrast to the activities seen in
the rest of the processing station.
Judging from a combination of skeletal elements, sexing, and
aging, a minimum of six bison were represented in the deposits.
Given the extent of the unexcavated deposits and the abundance of
material, many more than this number were actually processed.
The recovered remains represent four mature animals, a sub-adult,

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

101

and a fetus. Mandibles that could be aged and sexed (three left
ones) were all from females within the 5.5 to 9.5 years age
category (Frison and Reher 1970). The fourth adult was a male,
based on measurements on the skull recovered from the small bone
pile. The sub-adult was five years of age or younger, based on
unfused epiphyses and the known closing schedule of these (Koch
1935). Remains of a three-quarter term fetus consist of part of a
front leg, a vertebra, and a hyoid found grouped in one of the test
units along the eastern edge of Area 5.
No statement on seasonal use of the station can be reasonably
formulated at this time. The possibility of "out-of-season" births
among bison was always present (McHugh 1958; Wilson 1974}, and
one three-quarter term fetus does not necessarily indicate a spring
use. The mandibles could not be aged accurately enough to
determine the time of kill. Additional corroborative data will be
necessary before a seasonal determination can be made.
Intensive marrow processing is evident from the extensive bone
breakage, to the point of extraction even from phalanges. Marrow
processing has obliterated much of the bone damage done during
the initial butchering, although occasionally initial damage such as
defleshing cut lines on shaft sections or near ends of long bones
could be noted. Almost all long bones were represented by
proximal and distal ends, and were not as numerous as the M.N.I.
would indicate. Shafts were either broken through spiral fracturing
or the ends were chopped off. Neither technique was restricted to
particular elements; the same type of element was treated both
ways. However, there does appear to be a preference in the way
the two ends of a long bone were treated. Tibiae, for example,
generally had the proximal ends (areas of spongy bone) chopped
off, while controlled breakage was used on the distal ends (denser
bone). The tooth cavity of mandibles was generally exposed through
controlled breakage. Skull sections were recovered, indicating that
skulls had been completely disarticulated in the process of
removing the brains. Hide preparation may also have taken place
in the stations, given the number of lithic and bone scraping
implements found and the access to tanning material such as
brains.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Although the inventory list of recovered species is small, it
represents a predominantly grasslands fauna. The site environs
were restricted by the narrowness of the draw, which was less

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

than 500 meters at its widest point in the site area. Because of this,
although different ecological zones may be represented in the
assemblage, most animals could easily traverse these zones within
their daily activity patterns. Man, in particular, would have utilized
the various habitats in the draw and probably crossed them daily.
Differential habitat utilization by man can be seen in both economic
and spatial dimensions. Different cultural activities had their
particular geographic settings even though remains of the same
kinds of larger game animals were found in each. On the other
hand, some resources, particularly those of the marsh area, were
little utilized or perhaps ignored; while grasslands animals, both
large and small, were conspicuously consumed.
Most of the animals recovered were mammals, the rest were
reptiles. Fish, amphibians, and birds were conspicuously absent.
This situation may have been due to a combination of factors both
ancient and modern: the cultural activities being explored,
unfavorable habitats, and incompletely processed matrix concentrates. Mammals represented include cottontail (Sylvilgaus sp.),
black-tailed jack rabbit (Lepus californicus), black-tailed prairie dog
(Cynomys ludovicianus), coyote (Canis latrans), gray wolf (Cauls
lupus), badger (Taxidea taxus), pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra
americana), and modern bison (Bison bison). Reptiles recovered are
the pond turtle (Chrysemys scripta), ornate box turtle (Terrapene
ornata), Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and the
western diamond-back rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox). All of these
animals ranged into the region historically, although some were
extirpated from the area by encroaching civilization. Open
grasslands were indicated by bison, pronghorn antelope,
rabbit, box turtle, and rattlesnake. Short-grass prairie
inhabited by prairie dogs and their predators, such as badgers
coyotes. Cottontails and other animals, including coyotes

jack
was
and
and

wolves, favored the ecotonal areas of brushy grasslands. The pond
turtle was the only member of the riparian community.
Geological evidence documents a dry, upland area surrounding a
marsh/stream
complex.
Based
on
the
faunal
communities
represented, the reconstruction could be expanded. A mixed-grass
prairie existed in the draw, grading into a wet meadow area of the
marsh which merged into the spring-fed, small stream coursing
through the draw. Trees were scarce to non-existant as no
woodland dependent forms were recovered; but a few deciduous
trees may have been scattered along the waterway. Hackberry
(Celtis reticulata) seeds were recovered in the later 5C~ deposits
overlying the processing station. These trees are known historically

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

103

to have grown in various draws in the region [Holden 1962), and
exist today in Yetlowhouse Canyon several miles downstream from
the site. Although the present situation of the draw differs,
transformations brought about were due to European cultural
activities, not by climatic changes. The reconstruction represents
an historically modern view of the draw.
DISCUSSION
Garza occupations at the Lubbock Lake site occur sequentially
within a given stratigraphic context. Facies changes occur in the
deposits, and their correlations are important to both the
stratigraphic and cultural chronologies at the site. Since work had
been conducted at the site previous to the Lubbock Lake Project
excavations, correlation of the various efforts and defined
stratigraphic sequences were necessary. Excavations in Area 8
were particularly dependent on these correlations since the
project’s testing recovered no diagnostic artifacts but uncovered
more occupation levels than had been previously recognized. The
correlation of the strata and features uncovered by the two
excavations, those of Green (1962) and the Lubbock Lake Project,
was based on geologic work by Stafford (1977) and recent
reprofiling and analysis efforts by Kaczor {ms.). Although
designations of substrata differ, both unit description and thickness
of deposits match (Fig. 3). When plotted vertically, materials
recovered by Green (1962) show a linear distribution along the top
(first occupation level) and middle (second occupation level) of
substratum 5A,. A similar plot of features encountered in
substratum 5A in test units by the Lubbock Lake Project show the
same distribution for FA8-2 and FAS-4, respectively. In addition,
two other features were exposed, FAS-7 in the 5A2 soil zone above
FAS-2/first occupation level and FA8-5 in the 5A~ colluvium
immediately below FAS-4/second occupation level (Fig. 3). These
features may represent additional Garza period encampments, but
no diagnostic artifacts were recovered. Another feature (FA8-1)
was encountered in the 5B~ deposits above 5A. Since it contained
metal, Green (1962) reported that material in this substratum dated
from the time of the Singer store occupation (1880’s). Additional
processing stations were uncovered by the project’s excavations in
substratum 5C2. This substratum is a facies of 5B, and the stations
contained the butchered remains of modern bison and modern
horse (Equus caballus) in association with Washita and Fresno
points.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stratigraphy
The deposition of substrata 5A and 5B over the well-developed
4C soil horizon in Area 8 reflects changes in available moisture
and rainfall pattern in the area. Substratum 5A, is a predominantly
fluvial deposit with multiple lenses of caliche pebbles in the lower
part. These pebble beds are colluvial sediments representing
discontinuous sheets of slopewash. The upper part of 5A, is an
aeolian and fluvial deposit of very fine to medium silty sands,
ranging in color (moist) from brown (7.5YR5/4) to yellowish brown
(10YR5/3). A 35 cm thick soil (5A2) developed at the top of the 5A
deposits, consisting of fine to medium silty sands and brownish
black (10YR4/2 to 10YR5/3) in color. This soil development reflects
a change (of short duration) to more stable conditions and growth
of vegetation cover. Substratum 5B is a cyclic repeat of 5A, with
aeolian sands and stringers of slopewash sediments in the lower
(5B~) deposits and an aggrading soil development in the upper (5B2)
one. Substrata 5A and 5B are upland facies deposits of sands and
soils along the draw slope. The interface with substratum 5C, the
lowland marsh deposit in the center of the draw (Stafford 1977).
The lowland facies represents the repeated cutting and subsequent
infilling of the channel along the interior of the draw. In Area 5,
substratum 5C consists of two units. The lower half (5C~) is a
brownish-gray (10YR5/1), fine to medium sandy clay. This unit is
archeologically equivalent to that of substratum 5A in the upland
sequence. The upper unit (5C2) is a dark gray (5Y4/1), very fine to
fine silty, sandy clay which is archeologically equivalent to
substratum 5B.
Radiocarbon Dates and Cultura! Associations
Two radiocarbon determinations now date the Garza period
occupation at the Lubbock Lake site to the Historic period. Garza
points were originally believed to date prior to A.D. 1500 (Runkles
1964: 123). This assessment was made by Green (1962) based on his
work at the Lubbock Lake site and was applied by inference to the
Garza type site (Runkles 1964). The two dates of A.D. 1635
(350_+ 50; SI-2701) and A.D. 1665 (285 +_ 60; SI-2703) secured by the
Lubbock Lake Project suggest that Garza points continued at least
into the mid-1600’s. The first Europeans entered the region in A.D.
1541 (Holden 1962). At that time, the Lipan Apache were believed
to be the principal occupants of the area; their arrival on the Llano
Estacado is estimated to be about A.D. 1525 (Gunnerson 1956;
Collins 1971). The association of Garza points and Apache peoples
is further suggested by the recovery of both Garza points and a
micaceous blackware in the processing station, FA5-6. Campbell

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

105

(1976) believed this type of pottery to be distinctive of the Plains
Apache. Furthermore, Gunnerson (1969) recovered several
micaceous wares in New Mexico believed to be licarilla Apache,
although they date somewhat later in time (about A.D. 1700).
Finally, although Apaches on the Llano Estacado may have had
horses as early as the mid-1600’s through trade in New Mexico
(Oliver 1962), no horse remains were recovered from Garza period
activity areas at the site. Given these circumstances, the Garza
occupation probably represents a protohistoric period (i.e., a period
when Europeans had passed through the area but trade goods and
horses had not yet been acquired) with a time span of at least 150
years.
Garza points appear to be contemporaneous with the Apache
occupation of the area. There are a number of possible working
hypotheses. The pottery association suggests that the points may be
an Apache type. Whether this point type was indigenous, or
brought into the area by the Apaches, or developed by them after
their arrival, is uncertain. The known distribution of this type
favors the Garza point type being an indigenous form. The type
appeared to be largely confined to the Southern High Plains with
an extension into the E1 Paso area (Runkles 1964}. A further
extension down the Pecos River to the Sheffield area was made by
Lorrain (1968). In addition, Heartfield (1975) reported a Garza point
from Southwestern Coahuila. In any case, it appeared that this
point type may have been utilized for a fairly short time period in
the Southern High Plains, from the early 16th century to the mid to
late 17th century (Holliday 1977).
Concerning the radiocarbon determinations themselves, the dates
fall into a period of known fluctuation in the radiocarbon
chronology (Ralph 1971). Such fluctuations were studied and
assessed by several different radiocarbon laboratories. Various
fluctuation graphs and charts were presented, for example Ralph
(1971) and Suess {1970). Fluctuations appeared to be real, but there
is some disagreement as to the magnitude of fluctuation within
these periods. The radiocarbon dates reported here are
uncorrected. According to what is known about the fluctuations,
the dates are probably young. Using the MASCA correction table
(Ralph 1971: 28}, the dates could be as much as 50 years too young.
This correction factor would amend the dates, placing them into
the late 1500’s or early 1600’s. However, such a change is not
considered significant because this period is still within the known
time span of Apaches on the Llano Estacado. Such a correction

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

would, in fact, strengthen the hypothesis of a relationship between
Garza points and Apache culture.
Tool Assemblages
Several similarities exist among the tool assemblages recovered
from the Lubbock Lake site and other excavated Garza localities,
particularly among the collections from camping areas. Garza
points were found in association with other point types. At the
Lubbock Lake site they were in association with Harrell and "Lott"
points. Runkles (1964) recovered Garza, Harrell, and Fresno points
from the type locality. Wheat (1955), Word (1963), and Lorrain
(1968) reported Garza and Fresno points in association; while
Holden (1938) and Parsons (1967) recovered Garza points in
association with a variety of other types, including Harrell, Fresno,
and
"Lott."
While
size,
and
perhaps
function,
varied,
morphologically similar, steeply retouched, end scrapers (snubnosed) were also recovered from all the sites discussed. Wheat
(1955) recovered the tip of a bifacially flaked knife from Johnson
Creek, similar to the one recovered in the processing station at the
Lubbock Lake site. Edwards Plateau chert was the predominantly
used lithic source during the Garza period at the Lubbock Lake
site. Two-thirds of the lithic items recovered from the Johnson
Creek site (Wheat 1955) were of Edwards Plateau chert. While a
variety of materials were represented in the Blue Mountain Rock
Shelter (Holden 1938), Edwards Plateau chert was dominant.
However, at the Pete Creek site (Parsons 1967), both Edwards
Plateau and Tecovas cherts were used extensively. Tubular bone
beads were recovered from the Lubbock Lake site, Blue Mountain
Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), Johnson Creek site (Wheat 1955), and
the Garza type locality (Runkles 1964). Micaceous pottery was
found at the Lubbock Lake site, Blue Mountain Rock Shelter
(Holden 1938), Floydada Country Club site (Word 1963), and Red
Bluff Shelter (Lorrain 1968). Curiously, no pottery was recovered
from the Garza or Johnson Creek localities (Runkles 1964; Wheat
1955), from the lower two Garza occupation levels at Blue
Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), or from Green’s (1962) lower
Garza occupation level at the Lubbock Lake site.
The one major difference of note concerns the variety of cultural
activities represented by the camping areas of the several sites and
the processing station at the Lubbock Lake site. The main
distinction between the two assemblages is the presence of bone
expediency tools in the processing station. The variance of
settlement and procurement activities at the site is concordant with

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

107

a differential utilization of the site environs and resources.
Spatially, the activity areas were located in different topographic
settings, the processing station in the lowlands of the marsh/stream
complex and the camps along the dry, upland areas. Some of the
animal communities in the draw were ignored, while major
dependence was placed on one or two forms (i.e., bison and
antelope) from another. Small game items such as rabbits found in
the camping areas were used as subsidiary sources.
The Carza occupation at the Lubbock Lake site represents a
repeated occurrence both temporally and spatially. Different
cultural activities took place during the occupation in distinctive
locales. The radiocarbon determinations received on charcoal from
a hearth and ash-filled pit date the occupation to the Historic
period. However, because of the absence of European trade goods
and modern horse remains, the term Protohistoric for the period is
suggested. Circumstantial evidence is presented for a series of
working hypotheses regarding the cultural relationships between
Carza points and Apache peoples. Continued research, both at the
Lubbock Lake site and elsewhere, will be needed to test these
hypotheses, to identify historic aboriginal groups in the area and
their associated point types, and to trace the migrations of these
groups into and out of the region.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank M. Elizabeth King (The Museum, Texas Tech
University) for her editorial comments and suggestions; James H. Word
(Floydada, Texas) for his critical reading of the manuscript and
suggestions; and Jerome L. Thompson (The Museum, Texas Tech
University) for the photographic work. Grateful acknowledgements were
due the Pioneer Natural Gas Company (Lubbock and Amarillo) for their
cooperation and funds to test Area 14. This paper was part of the ongoing research of the Lubbock Lake Project, funded by the National
Science Foundation (Grants No. SOC75-14857, BNS 7612006), National
Geographic Society, Texas Historical Commission, and the City and
County of Lubbock

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED
Black, Craig C. (ed.)
1974 The History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum
Journal, The West Texas Museum Association Vol. 15, pp. 1-160,
Lubbock.
Campbell, Robert G.
1976The Panhandle Aspect of the Chaquaqua Plateau. Graduate
Studies Texas Tech University, No. 11, pp. 1-118.
Collins, Michael B.
1971 A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and Ethnohistory. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 16, No. 52, pp. 85-104.
Frison, George C. and Charles A. Reher
1970 Age Determination of Buffalo by Teeth Eruption and Wear. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 15, No. 50, part 2, pp. 46-50.
Green, F. E.
1962 The Lubbock Reservoir Site. The Museum Journal, The West Texas
Museum Association, Vol. 6, pp. 83-123, Lubbock.
Gunnerson, D. A.
1956 The Southern Athabascans: Their Arrival in the Southwest. E1
Palacio, Vol. 63, pp. 346-365.
Gunnerson, J. W.
1969Apache Archaeology in Northeastern New Mexico. American
Antiquity, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 23-39.
Heartfield, Lorraine
1975 Archeological Investigations of Four Sites in Southwestern
Coahuila, Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
46, pp. 127-177.
Holden, W. C.
1938 Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 208-221.
1962a The Land. In: L. L. Graves (ed.), A History of Lubbock, The West
Texas Museum Association, pp. 1-16, Lubbock.
1962b Indians, Spaniards, and Anglos. In: L. L. Graves (ed.), A History of
Lubbock, The West Texas Museum Association, pp. 17-44,
Lubbock.
Holliday, Vance T.
1977Cultural Chronology of the Lubbock Lake Site. Unpublished
master’s thesis, Texas Tech University.
Johnson, Eileen
1976 Investigations into the Zooarchaeology of the Lubbock Lake Site.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Texas Tech University.
Kaczor, Michael J.
ms. A Correlative Study of the West Texas Museum Excavations at the
Lubbock Lake Site, 1959-1961. Unpublished master’s thesis, Texas
Tech University.
Koch, Walter
1935 The Age Order of Epiphyseal Union in the Skeleton of the European
Bison (Bos Bonasus L.). Anatomical Record, Vol. 61, pp. 371-376.

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

109

Lorrain, Dessamae
1968 Excavations at Red Bluff Shelter (Sotol Site) Crockett County,
Texas (X41CX8). Transactions of the Fourth Regional
Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, pp. 18-39.
McHugh, Tom
1958 Social Behavior of the American Buffalo (Bison bison bison).
Zoologica, Vol. 43, pp. 1-40.
Oliver, Symmes C.
1962 Ecology and Cultural Continuity of Contributing Factors in the
Social Organization of the Plains Indians. University of California
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 48, No.
1, pp. 1-90.
Parsons, Mark L.
1967 Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas
During the Winter, 1966-1967. State Building Commission
Archeological Program, Report No. 7, pp. 1-108.
Perkins, Dexter and Patricia Daly
1968 A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey. Scientific American, Vol.
219, No. 5, pp. 96-106.
Ralph, E. K.
1971 Carbon 14 Dating. In: H. N. Michael and E. K. Ralph (eds.), Dating
Techniques for the Archaeologist. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Runkles, Frank A.
1964 The Garza Site, a Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 101-126.
Sellards, E. H.
1952 Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Stafford, Thomas W. Jr.
1977 Late Quaternary Alluvial Stratigraphy of Yellowhouse Draw,
Lubbock, Texas. In: Eileen Johnson and Thomas W. Stafford Jr.,
Cultural Adaptation to Ecological Change on the Llano Estacado.
Preliminary Report of the 1976 Field Season of the Lubbock Lake
Project. Report to the National Science Foundation. Edited by M.
Elizabeth King.
Suess, H. E.
1970 Bristlecone Pine Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale 5200
B.C. to the Present. In: I. U. Olsson (ed.), Radiocarbon Variations
and Absolute Chronology. Wiley, New York.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1955 Two Archaeological Sites Near Lubbock, Texas. Panhandle-Plains
Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 71-77.
Wilson, Michael
1974 The Casper Local Fauna and Its Fossil Bison. In: George C. Frison
(ed.), The Casper Site: A Hell Gap Bison Kill on the High Plains, pp.
125-172. Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Word, James H.
1963 Floydada Country Club Site. Bulletin of the South Plains
Archaeological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 37-63.

PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS
AT THE CRENSHAW SITE (3 MI 6),
SOUTHWEST ARKANSAS
MARY LUC:AS POWELL

ABSTRACT
One hundred and eight loose human teeth representing 16 adult
individuals were recovered from an antler pile and ash bed at
Crenshaw, a Coles Creek-Mid Caddo ceremonial center in southwest
Arkansas. A cluster of eight skulls was excavated from a plaza area
north of these features. Seventeenth century ethnographic accounts
describe a ceremony involving ritual burial of heads taken by the
Hasinai Caddo of East Texas in raids against enemy villages.
Osteological analysis suggests that the Crenshaw remains represent
such trophies of war.

The Crenshaw site is a large ceremonial center in southwest
Arkansas, dating from the Coles Creek to Mid-Caddo periods (ca.
900 A. D. to 1400 A. D.) (Hoffman 1970). It is located near the Great
Bend of the Red River, about 20 miles northeast of Texarkana, and
includes six mounds, at least five cemeteries and 20 acres of
discontinuous midden around and under the mounds. A number of
isolated skulls have been excavated from the open area south of
the mounds, known as "The Plaza of the Skulls".
In 1969 Dr. Frank Schambach of the Arkansas Archeological
Survey conducted excavations in the off-mound area south of
Mound D. Two highly unusual features were discovered. The first
(Feature 1) was a rectangular mass of deer antler approximately 4
by 4 meters and some 40 centimeters thick, composed of 2420
antlers from white-tailed deer. No skeletal material or artifacts
were found in this feature; however, human teeth and bits of
cranial bone were scattered around the southeast perimeter.
The second feature (Feature 6) was a bed of ash roughly 8 by 9
meters and 30 centimeters thick, which Schambach identified as a
temple floor (Schambach n.d.). The ash contained a large number of
loose human teeth and cranial fragments scattered apparently at
random. An isolated human mandible was recovered from a small
pit (Feature 8A) at the northern edge of the bed.
Both features have been radiocarbon dated from wood charcoal
to around 1000 A.D. (see Chart below). The artifact assemblage
from the ash bed corresponds to the Millers Crossing Phase, the
earliest Caddo Phase identified in western Arkansas (Schambach

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

n.d.). The two features are aligned horizontally in a precisely
adjacent manner, with no overlapping of their lateral margins; this
alignment offers further support that they were contemporaneous.
Radiocarbon Dates from Wood Charcoal
Sample Number
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX

1351
1352
1353
1360
1356

Date
A.D. 1000 _ 50
A.D. 1010 _+ 50
A.D. 1100_+ 50
A.D. 980_+60
A.D.

990_+60

The human teeth scattered around the antler pit represent a
minimum of six adult individuals, identified by six left maxillary
canines. Their distribution coincides with the locations of clusters
of human cranial fragments in five out of the six cases. Of the 35
teeth from this area, only four (11%) are mandibular, an
unexpectedly low proportion. The 73 teeth from the ash bed
represent at least ten adult individuals, identified by ten left
maxillary first molars. They were evenly distributed within the
horizontal boundaries of the ash bed, but concentrated more
heavily in the central vertical level. Thirty-three teeth (45%) came
from this level, as compared with 24 teeth (33%) from the upper
level and 16 teeth (22%) from the lower level. Again, only 13 (18%)
of the teeth are mandibular. There were no mandibular teeth at all
in the lower level, directly beneath the heaviest concentration of
artifacts and teeth in the ash bed.
The absence of postcranial skeletal material cannot be attributed
to differential bone preservation, as a great quantity of small
animal bone was recovered by screening the ash. It seems more
probable that a number of human skulls were separated from their
bodies and brought to this spot to serve some purpose in connection
with the antler pile and ash bed.
A group of eight skulls had been donated to the Arkansas
Archeological Survey in 1968 by the landowner, Lon Rayburn. He
had exposed these in the midden-free area 40 meters north of the
ash bed, known as "The Plaza of the Skulls". He reported that over
the past few years he had found some 30 skulls, placed singly or in
groups in pits without postcranial material or artifacts, in this
portion of the site. Isolated skulls are not uncommon at Caddo sites;
they have been discovered at Spiro (Brown 1966), Belcher (Webb
1959), and Ferguson (Rose and Powell n.d.), to name only a few. At

PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS

113

the end of the 17th Century, the Spanish priests Espinosa and
Casanas observed a ceremony of the Hasinai Caddo in East Texas
which involved the ritual burial of the "heads of victims taken by
the Hasinai" in raids against enemy settlements (Griffith 1954:
132}. It is not out of the question that a similar ceremony was
performed by the Caddo who inhabited the Crenshaw site several
centuries earlier. In view of the evidence, it seems perhaps the
most reasonable explanation for these bodiless skulls.
Espinosa refers to these war trophies alternately as "heads" and
"skulls". Examination of the eight skulls revealed certain features
which indicate that these, at least, were buried as "heads," i.e.,
with the flesh still covering the bone. In all eight, the mandibles
were in normal articulation with the crania, both at the temporomandibular joints and at the occlusal edges of the anterior teeth.
Such articulation would be unlikely in skulls buried without their
connecting tissue. A more striking feature is the presence of the
first cervical vertebra in articulation with the occipital condyles of
four of the eight skulls. A fifth skull preserved its articulation with
both the first and second cervical vertebrae. Fragments of the
hyoid bone were recovered from the dirt beneath the mandibles of
two skulls. The three skulls apparently lacking these associated
bones were the most badly crushed of the eight, and it is possible
that fragments of vertebrae and hyoid were present but
unidentified. These cervical vertebrae would not normally preserve
their close articulation with the condyles at the base of the skull in
the absence of connecting tissue, nor would the hyoid maintain its
position below the mandible. They would not necessarily be
dislodged during decapitation, due to their close proximity to the
base of the skull and the thickness of the surrounding musculature.
None of the skulls bore marks which could be interpreted as
fleshing cuts or scrapes. Several showed signs of gnawing by
rodents, but this is common for buried skeletal material from
western Arkansas and does not necessarily indicate exposure of
the bone before burial.
Six of the skulls were sexed as male and two as female. These
decisions were based upon standard features of cranial
morphology listed by Bass (1971) and Krogman (1973), including the
supraorbital ridges and margins, prominence of the forehead and
parietal regions, the shape of the orbits and the chin. General
indicators of robusticity such as the mastoid process and crest, the
external occipital protruberance and nucchal area, the temporal
lines, lateral diameter of the mandible head and its thickness at M2
were also considered. These eight individuals fell within the ranges

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of size and robusticity observed in Caddo populations from
Ferguson, Hedges, Copeland Ridge and other sites in western
Arkansas (Hynds and Powell n.d.; Rose and Powell n.d.).
Age estimations were based upon dental eruption, attrition and
degree of closure of the cranial sutures (Krogman 1973}. One skull
was aged at 17 to 25 years, because of incomplete eruption of the
third molars and light wear on the erupted teeth. Another was
placed in the 40 to 45 years old category because of advanced
attrition, numerous resorbed sockets and the almost complete
ectocranial obliteration of the coronal, sagittal and lambdoid
sutures. Of the remaining six, two were aged at 20 to 30 years and
four were aged at 30 to 40 years. The majority of the molars from
the antler pile and ash bed showed similar attrition and would be
placed in the last two age categories.
The inclusion of two female skulls among a group of probable
war tropies is not inconsistent with the practice of warfare among
the Indians of this area, as observed by early European
chroniclers. The Hasinai customarily returned from battle with the
heads and scalps of both male and female enemies. Joutel reported
of them that "of the 48 persons (taken in a Hasinai raid) they gave
quarter only to some young children" and that the war party
returned to their village "loaded with heads..." (Swanton 1942:
186). The selection of the most robust male skull to crown the
cluster of eight was surely deliberate, in view of this interpretation.
Only one of the skulls showed any notable pathology: the
parietals and upper occitipal area of the top skull were thickened
to 11/2 times their normal size. This condition was accompanied by
extensive osteoporotic pitting of the cortex in these parts. Taken
together, these pathological changes suggest a fairly severe degree
of anemia (Jane Buikstra 1976, personal communication).
Dental pathologies were also minimal among these eight
individuals. Forty-five caries were observed in a total of 228 teeth,
for a mean rate of 5.6 caries per individual and 0.2 caries per
tooth. Only one individual had no caries at all. The molars offered
the preferred site for carious involvement, due to their greater
surface area and complexity. These rates are similar to those
observed for other populations from western Arkansas, dating from
the Mid to Late Caddo periods (Hynds and Powell n.d.; Rose and
Powell n.d.). Two individuals exhibited alveolar abscesses, and the
oldest of the group had lost five teeth who sockets had been
completely resorbed. Calculus was common in all individuals
except one, the youngest of the eight, but it generally appeared as
stains rather than as three-dimensional deposits.

PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS

115

Three anomalous traits were observed in these eight skulls:
Carabelli’s cusp, congenital absence of the third molar and
exostoses of the external auditory canal. The first two traits are
under strict genetic control and do not appear responsive to
environmental stimuli (Goose and Lee 1971; Brekhus, Oliver and
Montelius 1944). Clinical studies of the exostoses of the external
auditory canal indicate that they are more frequent among groups
of closely related persons than among random members of a
population. Environmental pressures seem to exert some influence
on their actual expression, however (Hrdlicka 1935).
The accessory tubercules on the mesiolingual aspect of the
maxillary molars known as Carabelli’s cusps appeared in two of
the eight dentitions, an incidence rate of 25 per cent. Rates of
incidence for these discrete traits among other western Arkansas
populations range between 43% and 27% for the two Coles Creek
period populations represented at Mounds C and F at Crenshaw, to
14% for the Hedges and 19% for the Copeland Ridge populations,
two Late Caddo sites on the Ouachita River. The trait was observed
on eight of the 37 undamaged maxillary molars from the antler pile
and ash bed at Crenshaw, a rate of 22 per cent. These rates may
be skewed by the admittedly small sample sizes, but they do appear
to confirm the findings of recent dental researchers that this trait
is not so uncommon among Mongoloid populations as was once
believed, provided that a11 levels of its expression are scored: the
pit, the groove and the cuspule, as well as the complete cusp
(Kraus 1959: 123).
The rates of incidence for the two other traits appeared to be
unusually high for this group of eight skulls, when compared with
most of the other western Arkansas populations mentioned earlier
in this paper. Observations of these discrete traits meet the
requirements for a binomial distribution, in that each trait can be
scored simply as present or absent {Thomas 1976). Rates of
incidence for these two traits were calculated for the populations
represented at the Hedges, Copeland Ridge and Ferguson sites and
for Mounds C and F at Crenshaw. Using these rates for
comparison, probabilities for obtaining the seemingly high rates
observed in the eight skulls were calculated using the binomial
density function {Thomas 1976).
Three of the eight skulls showed congenital absence of at least
one third molar, for an incidence rate of 37.5 per cent. In one case,
the left lateral maxillary incisor was also absent. Both of these
features are considered to be related expressions of the same
genetic factors {Brekhus, Oliver and Montelius 1944). Combining

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the populations of the Hedges and Copeland Ridge sites, the incidence observed for this trait was nine per cent. The probability
for obtaining a sample with an incidence of three out of eight
cases, or 37.5%, from such a population is 0.0215, a very low probability. A similarly low probability exists for obtaining this 37.5%
incidence rate from a population such as the Coles Creek period
sample from Mound F at Crenshaw. The incidence for the Hedges
sample alone was somewhat higher, and the probability for obtaining the rate observed in the eight skulls rose to 0.0755. At the 0.05
level of significance, therefore, the sample of eight skulls does not
differ for this one trait from the population represented at the
Hedges site.
Four of the eight skulls displayed exostoses or bony outgrowths
in the external auditory canals, an incidence rate of 50 per cent.
This condition is clinically noted to be more prevalent in males, and
if expressed in females is more frequently unilateral than bilateral
(Hrdlicka 1935). The Crenshaw sample reflected this sexual
distribution. Combining the Caddo samples from the Hedges and
Ferguson sites with the two Coles Creek period samples from
Mounds C and F at Crenshaw, the probability for obtaining a
sample with an incidence rate of 50% was calculated to be 0.0046,
an extremely small probability. Once again, however, the Hedges
sample alone provided a higher rate or incidence, 40%, and
therefore the probability for obtaining a sample of eight with an
incidence rate only 10% higher was calculated to be 0.2322, or
nearly one in four chances.
The results of these comparisons appear to indicate that the
population represented by the eight skulls was more similar to a
population such as that represented at the Hedges site than to
other populations in western Arkansas, on the basis of these two
discrete traits. However, the small sample size, as well as the
chronological discontinuity between these two sites, makes any
conclusions based upon these observations extremely tentative.

SUMMARY
One hundred and eight loose human teeth were recovered from
Feature 1, an antler pile, and Feature 6, an ash bed, at the
Crenshaw site. These represent a total of 16 adult individuals who
were apparently decapitated and their skulls brought to the site to
serve some purpose related to these two features. A group of eight
skulls excavated from the "Plaza of the Skulls" at the same site,
representing six males and two females, probably suffered the

PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS

117

same fate. Osteological analysis indicated that these skulls were
buried while still covered with flesh. Ethnographic accounts of the
Hasinai Caddo of East Texas at the end of the 17th Century
indicate that these skulls may represent war trophies. Comparisons
based on binomial probability of the eight skulls with skeletal
material from other western Arkansas sites suggest a closer
biological affinity with populations from the Ouchita River Valley
than with the Coles Creek period populations represented at the
Crenshaw site, on the basis of two non-metric traits. However, the
samples are too small to draw any meaningful conclusions regarding biological distance between these populations. Such studies
must await the recovery of large, well-documented skeletal series
from this area, if questions of cultural affinity are to be answered
from the skeletal record.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Drs. Frank Schambach, Jane Buikstra, Jerome C.
Rose and Martha A. Rolingson for their advice and encouragement.
Particular thanks go to Sandra Scholtz, who introduced me to the
mysteries of binomial probability.

REFERENCES

CITED

Bass, W. M.
1971 Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual of the Human
Skeleton. Missouri Archaeological Society, Columbia.
Brekhus, P. l., C. P. Oliver and G. Montelius
1944 A Study of the Pattern and Combinations of Congenitally Missing
Teeth in Man. Journal of Dental Research, Vol. 23, pp. 117-131.

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Brown, J. A.
1966 Spiro Studies: Volume 2, The Graves and Their Contents. University
of Oklahoma Research Institute, Norman.
Goose, D. H. and G. T. R. Lee
1971 The Mode of Inheritance of Carabelli’s Cusp. Human Biology, Vol.
43, pp. 64-69.
Griffith, W. J.
1954 The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans 1687-1772.
Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University, New
Orleans.
Hoffman, M. P.
1970 Archaeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River Basin
in Arkansas. In: Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red
River Basin, edited by Hester A. Davis. Arkansas Archeological
Survey Research Series, No. 1, Fayetteville.
Hrdlicka, A.
1935 Ear Exostoses. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 93, No.
6, pp. 1-100.
Hynds, B. and M. L. Powell
n.d. Skeletal Analysis of 69 Burials from Arkansas. Paper read at the
Caddo Conference, March 1975, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Kraus, B. S.
1959 Occurrence of the Carabelli Trait in Southwest Ethnic Groups.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 117124.
Krogman, W. M.
1973 The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine. C.C. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.
Rose, J. C. and M. L. Powell
n.d. Analysis of Human Skeletal Material from the Ferguson Site.
Manuscript on file with the Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Southern Arkansas University, Magnolia.
Schambach, F. F.
n.d. Deer Ceremonialism in Early Caddo Culture: Evidence from the
Crenshaw Site in Southwest Arkansas. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Southern Arkansas University, Magnolia.
Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo
Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 132.
Thomas, D. H.
1976 Figuring Anthropology. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Webb, C. H.
1959 The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish,
Louisiana. Memoirs of the Society for American Archeology, Salt
Lake City.

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS
OF WEST TEXAS CERAMICS:
A STATISTICAL EVALUATION
CAROLYN EKLAND

ABSTRACT
A neutron activation study of west Texas Jornada Mogollon ceramics
was statistically evaluated to see if the neutron activation technique is
useful for distinguishing between ceramics manufactured by different
cultural groups in separate geographical areas. The results of this study
indicate that ceramics from a settled village site at Hueco Tanks show
less variation in their element composition than ceramics collected from
a number of widely dispersed, intermittently occupied sites in the
Guadalupe Mountains area. The analysis further indicates that ceramics
manufactured in widely separated geographical environments are
generally distinct in their total element composition. The results of the
statistical tests suggest that the elements most useful for showing these
distinctions are the major constituents of clays.

INTRODUCTION
Neutron activation analysis is an analytical technique which is
used to identify and measure the abundances of elements found in
various geologic materials. Archeologists have recently found that
knowledge of the element composition of artifacts can be useful for
solving problems of a cultural nature such as locating the place of
origin for artifacts or for establishing the existence of prehistoric
contact between groups in separate geographical areas. Gordus et
al. (1967) and Gordus et a!. (1971) used neutron activation to locate
the source of obsidian artifacts found in Hopewell burial mounds,
and Allen et al. (1975) used the technique to identify the source
material of steatite or soapstone bowls from sites in the eastern
United States. Sabloff (1971) used data from neutron activation of
Fine Orange and other pottery types to infer trade networks or
movements of people between a number of Terminal Classic and
Early Postclassic Maya sites, and Bennyhoff and Heizer (1965) used
neutron activation of ceramics to suggest trade between the sites of
Cuicuilco and Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico.
In neutron activation analysis a small sample is extracted from
an artifact and placed in a nuclear reactor where it is bombarded
with free neutrons. During the irradiation process some of the
elements in the sample will absorb neutrons to form radioactive
isotopes. Because these radioactive isotopes are unstable they will

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

decay to the stable form over a period of time, emitting gamma
rays during the disintegration process. The gamma ray emissions
from the decaying isotopes exhibit characteristic energy levels and
rates of decay which allow the investigator to identify the isotopes
and, thereby, the stable elements from which they were produced.
Quantitative measurements can be obtained by counting the gamma
ray emissions from each of the elements detected in the sample and
comparing these with emissions from standards irradiated under
the same conditions (Meyers and Denier 1972: 4-7).
Due to individual differences in the elements’ absorption of
neutrons, and variations in the rate of decay for the resulting
isotopes, different irradiation periods and counting schedules are
employed in the analysis. Different elements and their respective
amounts will be detected in each of the counts.

PROBLEM
Neutron activation studies have revealed that samples of
material from the same geologic source or area are not always
homogeneous in their element composition (Bowman et al. 1973);
however, the element composition of source materials will often
exhibit greater variation between different geographical regions
than will materials extracted from within any one local (Allen et al.
1975). The analysis reported in this paper uses the results of a
neutron activation study of west Texas ceramics to assess the
relative homogeneity of element composition both within and
between sherd populations drawn from two separate geographical
areas. The analysis was further attempted to determine whether
some inferences could be made as to the possible manufacturing
origins for some of the pottery types in the sample. The actual
neutron activation study which provides the basis for the
statistical analysis reported in this paper was not conducted by the
author; however, a description of the sample analyzed and a short
discussion of the results is essential to understanding the statistical
evaluation which follows.
Twenty-six sherds from the west Texas area were selected for
the neutron activation study. The sample included 16 sherds which
were randomly selected from a large sherd population collected by
George Kegley from a Mogollon pithouse village at Hueco Tanks
State Park in E1 Paso County (Figure 1); 10 sherds were selected
from a sample collected from nine intermittently occupied sites in
the Guadalupe Mountains National Park along the HudspethCulberson County border by members of the 1970 Texas

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

121

Archeological Society field school (Figures 1 and 2). One of the
sherds in the Guadalupe Mountains sample had no actual site
provenience and was included as a random specimen. It is
suspected that the sites in the Guadalupe Mountains area were
occupied either by small transient Mogollon groups or by other
cultural groups who were interacting with the Mogollon settlements
further to the west (Harry J. Shafer, personal communication).

Guadalupe Mountains
National Park

NEW MEXICO

41EP2A ~

El Paso co.

.2’ ~
41HZ43
41HZ48
41HZ50
41HZ68
41HZ71
41HZ77
41HZ78
RS 18

/

~,

41CU19

Culbertson Co.

Hudspeth Co.

0

25

Scale of Miles

FIGURE 1. Map of West Texas Area Showing the Locations of Hueco
Tanks State Park and Guadalupe Mountains National Park

The 26 sherds used in the analysis represent several types of
pottery generally associated with the Jornada Mogollon ceramic
assemblage. Of the 16 sherds from the settled village, 12 were El
Paso Brown, two were Chupadero Black on White, and two were
Mimbres Classic Black on White. Of the I0 samples from the
Guadalupe Mountains area, eight were El Paso Brown, one was
Chupadero Black on White, and one was an unclassified specimen

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

122

resembling the E1 Paso Brown ware in paste composition but with
an orange slip. The following are the general type descriptions for
the ceramics used in the analysis:

1

¯ 41HZ43
41HZ48

4111Z68

4 IHZ71
" 41HZ77
¯ 41MZ78

.41MZ41

.41HZ50

J
o

j
Scale Of Miles

o
U

~io~
41CU19 ¯

FIGURE 2. Map of Southwest Corner of Guadalupe Mountains
National Park Showing the Site Locations for Ceramics Used in the

Project.
E1 Paso Brown -- A coiled, undecorated ware with a soft granular
and friable paste. Paste color is generally a medium brown with
surfaces often discolored by firing clouds. Tempering materials vary
depending on the local but frequently include feldspars, gypsum, sand,
or some combination of these (Runyan and Hendrick 1973: 21-22).
Chupadero Black on White -- A coiled, well-fired ware with a fine
textured paste. The paste color is uniform and ranges from light to dark
grey. Vessels are generally slipped white or grey-white and painted with
a black mineral paint. Temper varies with the area of manufacture
often consisting of quartz sand, basalt, or basalt with crushed sherds
(Runyan and Hendrick 1973: 37-38).
Mimbres Classic Black on White -- A coiled ware with a relatively
fine, porous, and friable paste. Paste colors range from light grey to

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

123

grey-black. Interiors of vessels are slipped a heavy white and decorated
with black mineral paint. The characteristic temper is a fine to medium
quartz sand {Runyan and Hendrick 1973: 36}.
Orangeware -- An unclassified specimen with method of manufacture
and paste characteristics closely resembling pottery of the E1 Paso
Brown type. Unlike the E1 Paso Brown, however, the specimen features
an orange slip.

Clay samples were not available from either locality. Admittedly
it would be desirable to have the element composition of the local
clays for comparison.
The ceramics were analyzed through neutron activation by
Rebecca Wright (Ms.) at Texas A&M University. Two samples
from each of the 26 sherds were prepared and used in the analysis.
One sample from each sherd was irradiated for 30 seconds and the
gamma ray emissions counted for five minutes; the second group
was irradiated for 14 hours and the gamma ray emissions counted
for 60 minutes.
This method of analysis identified 16 different elements in the
ceramics as a whole; however, not all of the 16 elements were
detected in each sherd. The short irradiation and count revealed
the presence and amounts of aluminum, calcium, chlorine,
potassium, magnesium, manganese, sodium, and vanadium; with the
exception of chlorine these elements were detected in all of the
pottery samples analyzed. The longer irradiation and count yielded
the presence and amounts of arsenic, gold, bromine, cadmium,
cerium, potassium, lanthanum, sodium, antimony, and samarium;
the presence of these elements was considerably more variable for
only lanthanum, sodium, and samarium were detected in all of the
ceramics. The quantitative analysis also indicated that the majority
of the long-run elements were present in considerably smaller
concentrations than those detected in the short count.
As was mentioned earlier, the following analysis was conducted
to evaluate the potential of neutron activation analysis as a means
for assessing the relative homogeneity of element composition both
within and between two ceramic populations and to determine
whether any inferences could be made as to the manufacturing
origins for some of the ceramic types. The two populations selected
for the study were drawn from widely separated geographical
environments, each occupied by cultural groups differing in their
degree of sedentism. Provided that the assumption that artifacts
manufactured from materials in one particular local will show
similarities in element composition is true, it is hypothesized that
due to differences in selected clay sources, the sherds from the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

124

settled village will show less variation in element composition than
will the samples collected from the more widely dispersed,
intermittently occupied sites. It is further believed that if the two
geologic environments are sufficiently different this will be
reflected in the clay sources, the end result being that each group
of ceramics will exhibit differences in total element composition.
The black on white ceramic types collected from both the settled
village and Guadalupe Mountains area are not believed to be
native to the region and are suspected to be imports (Harry J.
Shafer, personal communication). If this is true, the analysis should
indicate that the element composition of their clays is distinct from
the other ceramics used in the analysis.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
A recent neutron activation study of ceramics has revealed that
often times clays from different areas of the world do not exhibit
distinct differences in their element composition, especially if single
elements or only a very few elements are considered (Harbottle
1970: 29). For this reason it was decided that a statistical method
which could incorporate the data for as many elements as possible
was necessary for testing the hypotheses proposed in this paper. A
factor analysis was selected as the statistical technique which
would provide the kinds of information most useful for the project.
The first part of the project involved recording on computer
cards the amounts of such element detected in each sherd. A factor
analysis (Nie et al. 1975) was then used to reduce these data to a
smaller set of variables called factors; each of these factors
represents a distinct pattern of variation which is shared by
certain elements in the clays. Only nine of the sixteen elements
were selected for the analysis as they were present in the majority
of the samples. Due to missing data for some of these nine
elements, the factor analysis ignored the one Chupadero Black on
White sherd from the Guadalupe Mountains area, reducing the
data set to 25 cases.
The factor analysis produced three factors which accounted for
80.8% of the variation in the data. The factor matrix, shown in
Table I, indicates that there are three independent patterns of
interrelated elements in the clays of the ceramics; strong loadings,
which are underlined in the matrix, show which individual
elements are characteristic of each factor. The strong positive
loadings for Factor I indicate that there is an element pattern in
the clays which lanthanum, sodium, and samarium are involved in;

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

125

the absolute amounts of the loadings measure how closely each
element is related to this pattern, that is, the higher the loading the
closer the relationship between the element and the pattern.

TABLE 1. ROTATED FACTOR MATRIX

Factor I
Aluminum

Calcium
Potassium
Magnesium
Manganese
Vanadium
Lanthanum
Sodium
Sama rium

Factor H

Factor HI

.01

.87

.42

-.22
-.23
.18
.06
.01
.99
.8_33
.9_44

.00
.24
.39
.6_!7
.7__99
.03
.05
.02

.74
.744
.6_!
.18
-.02
-.17
-.04
-. 12

TABLE 1. ROTATED FACTOR MATRIX

Three factor scores for each of the 25 sherds were also obtained
and can be seen in Table 2. These scores measure the relative
importance of each sherd to the particular factor; a high positive
score indicates that the sherd contains a high proportion of those
elements characteristic of the factor and a high negative value
indicates that the particular sherd is deficient in the elements
characteristic of the factor.
To test the hypothesis that the ceramics from the settled village
would show less variation in element composition than would those
from the sites in the Guadalupe Mountains area, the variance of
the factor scores for each of the sherd samples were calculated
and compared; factor scores, rather than the actual amounts of
each element detected in each sherd, could be used for this as the
meaningful variation in the original data is not lost when factor
scores are computed (Rummel 1967: 451). Two measures of the
variance for the settled village ceramics were calculated for each
set of factor scores, one for all 16 of the sherds and one for only
the brownware; if the black on white ceramics were imports to the
site and thus manufactured from clays of a different element
composition it was suspected that this would be reflected in the
variance. One measure of the variance was calculated for the
sherds from the Guadalupe Mountains region, again for each group
of factor scores; the orangeware specimen was included with the
brownware due to similarities in the paste composition.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

126

TABLE 2. FACTOR SCORES FOR SHERDS

Settled Village
E1 Paso Brown
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Chupadero
Black on White
13
14
Mimbres Classic
Black on White
15
16
Scattered Sites
E1 Paso Brown
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Orangeware
25

Factor I

Factor II

Factor HI

-.14
1.28
3.39
.40
-1.79
.77
-1.01
-.65
-.23
-.41
1.25
-.29

.80
.70
-.39
.57
.51
-.11
.30
-.13
-.47
.29
.49
.43

-.06
.37
.37
.12
-.08
.44
.20
.16
-.02
-.33
-.29
-.08

-.93
-.56

-1.27
2.38

2.90
-.00

-.33
-.69

-.59
.07

1.68
-.30

.15
-.12
.32
.61
-.76
.25
.54
-.15

-.14
.30
2.30
-.86
-1.28
-1.13
-.94
-.97

-.29
.54
.53
-.96
-.70
-.69
-1.19
-1.29

-.90

-.88

-1.02

1.39
1.65
.25

.60

.65
.06
.42

Variance
Settled Village
All Ceramics
Brownware
Guadalupe Mountains

TABLE 2. FACTOR SCORES FOR INDIVIDUAL SHERDS

.16
1.14

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

127

The variance of the factor scores for both groups of sherds from
the settled village and for the brownware from the Guadalupe
Mountains sites can be seen at the bottom of Table 2. For the
factors that loaded heavily for the elements in the short count,
Factors II and Ill, the variance of the factor scores for the settled
village brownware was lower than that of the Guadalupe
Mountains sample; this indicates that the composition of the
elements characteristic of these factors was more homogeneous.
This difference in the variance was expected as it seems likely that
the ceramics from the village would have been manufactured from
one or a few good clay sources located close to the village while
those from the Guadalupe Mountains area would have been
manufactured from a number of different sources.
For the factor that loaded heavily for the elements detected in
the longer irradiation and count the situation was reversed, that is,
the settled village sample showed a considerably higher variance
than did the Guadalupe Mountains group due to some extremely
high and low concentrations of lanthanum, sodium, and samarium
in some of the sherds. This was not expected and may be directly
related to the characteristics of the clay samples used in the actual
neutron activation study. Earlier studies have indicated that
ceramics are not homogeneous and that small samples will differ to
some degree from the body as a whole (Perlman and Asaro 1971:
188). It has been further determined that elements that occur in
very small amounts will not be dispersed in a statistically
satisfactory number of particles if the pottery is not well
homogenized (Perlrnan and Asaro 1971: 184). Both lanthanum and
samarium, which contributed the most heavily to the factor, were
found in considerably smaller amounts than most of the other
elements. If the ceramics were not well homogenized these
elements would not be well dispersed in the clays, the end result
being that either high or low concentrations could be present
depending on where the actual sample was extracted from the
sherd. Taking the size of the two populations into consideration,
sixteen for the settled village as opposed to nine for the scattered
sites, the greater variation exhibited by the settled village ceramics
does not seem unreasonable for there would be an increased
possibility that more extremes would appear in a larger population.
When the variance of the factor scores for all the settled village
ceramics

were

compared

with

the

variance

for

only

the

brownware, there was an increase in the variance for the elements
important in Factors II and Ill; once again this occurred because
certain pieces of the black on white ceramics contained larger

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

amounts of some of the elements especially calcium, potassium,
manganese, and vanadium. However, the variance for elements
characteristic of Factor I decreased because the amounts of these
elements in the black on white pieces were closer to the average,
the extremes being found in the brownware population.
While the results of this rather simple analysis should not be
considered conclusive due to the small size of the sample and the
possibility of measurement errors in the neutron activation study
itself, it would appear that the settled village ceramics showed less
variation in element composition than did those from the Guadalupe
Mountains area. In this instance the elements from the short count
were the most useful for assessing the relative homogeneity for the
two populations of ceramics as they were present in large amounts
and were found in all of the samples. The elements detected in the
longer count appeared to be relatively useless for this kind of
analysis for two reasons: first, not all of the elements were found
in all of the pottery samples analyzed; and second, those that were
detected in all of the samples were present in such small
concentrations that they would be susceptible to extreme variation
from sample to sample if the clays were not well homogenized.
Each of the three sets of factor scores were then plotted against
each other on scattergrams to see if the scattered site sample
would separate out from the settled village ceramics. Both Factor II
and III exhibited some separation when plotted against Factor I;
however, the most distinct separation occurred between Factor II
and III (Figure 3). Both Factor II and III exhibited heavy loadings
for some of the major elements found in clays including aluminum,
calcium, potassium, and magnesium (Shepard 1971:6-10 and
374-377).
The scattergram plot revealed two general clusters, one for the
settled village ceramics and one for the dispersed settlement
sample (Figure 3). One sherd from the scattered site population (18)
clustered with the settled village, and one (19) fell outside both the
dispersed settlement and settled village populations; in both cases
these ceramics contained greater concentrations of the major clay
elements than did the rest of the scattered site sample. Three of
the four black on white pottery pieces also failed to cluster with
the settled village sample; this suggests that although the ceramics
were found at the settled village they were manufactured from a
different clay source than the brownware, lending support to the
hypothesis that they are not indigenous to the site.

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

129

(ACAOSS~ IAC;OR3
"1.m5191

..6632O

-.2aa,~

.t?~22

.~V~3

I.ett63

I.~3e31

I.~4~lS

2.~677b

~.6a~47

¯ 14

Z,376A~

÷ 19

2.errS8

t.Z^est

.~t5~2
.i
-2
.4

.s~o~e

*?

¯ io

+18

° 16

"’~

"’""~
~

",gt~O

*24
2~+ 20
z + ¯ 23
!
!
!

.~

"~

*f

x
!

l

* 22

FIGURE 3. Scattergram of Factor II and Factor III.

Although the separation of the two ceramic populations is not
perfect, the scattergram plot indicates that the Guadalupe
Mountains sample is generally distinct from the settled village
ceramics in element composition and that it is the major
constituents of clay that best reflect this difference.

CONCLUSIONS
Although neutron activation analysis has generally been addressed to problems of ceramic origins, this statistical evaluation
has indicated that the results are also useful for distinguishing
between populations of ceramics drawn from sites occupied by
cultural groups differing in their degree of sedentism. It has
further indicated that the results of neutron activation studies can
be successfully used to differentiate between ceramic populations
manufactured in separate geographical environments. The
statistical tests suggest that when dealing with problems of this
nature it is best to focus on elements found in the greatest
abundances in ceramics, especially the major constituents of clays.

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The minor trace elements detected in considerably smaller
amounts proved to be useless for either accurately assessing
ceramic homogeneity within populations or for distinguishing
between populations from different geographical areas; this is most
likely related to the actual characteristics of the ceramics
themselves for if pottery is not well homogenized the amounts of
these elements could exhibit wide variation depending on where
the sample was extracted from the sherd. However, the detection
of these trace elements would likely be of critical importance to the
investigator dealing with ceramic origins for they would most likely
reflect slight differences in various geologic surroundings.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A number of people were most helpful during the course of the
project, and to them I extend my thanks: Dr. Harry J. Sharer, of Texas
A&M University, who suggested the project and provided the data that
were used in the statistical analysis; Mr. George Kegley who supplied
the ceramics used in the neutron activation study and Ms. Rebecca
Wright, a chemistry major at Texas A&M University, who performed the
actual neutron activation analysis; Mr. Roland Henry, of the Nuclear
Analytical Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin, for his help
in interpreting the results of the neutron activation study; and Mr. Rick
Plattsmier, of the Computation Center at The University of Texas at
Austin, for his patience and valuable assistance in setting up the
statistical programs. Special thanks are extended to Dr. Joel Gunn of
The University of Texas at San Antonio and Dr. Daniel Price of The
University of Texas at Austin, for their suggestions on how to approach
the problem and for their assistance in interpreting the results of the
statistical tests.

REFERENCES

CITED

Allen, R. O., A. H. Luckenbach, and C. G. Holland
1975 The Applications of Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis to a
Study of Prehistoric Steatite Artifacts and Source Materials.
Archaeometry, Vol. 17, part 1, pp. 69-83.
Bennyhoff, J. A. and R. F. Heizer
1965 Neutron Activation Analysis of Some Cuicuilco and Teotihuacan
Pottery: Archaeological Interpretations of Results. American Antiquity, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 348-349.

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

131

Bowman, H. R., F. Asaro, and I. Perlman
1973 Composition Variations in Obsidian Sources and the Archaeological
Implications. Archaeometry, Vol. 15, Part 1, pp. 123-127.
Gordus, A. A., W. C. Fink, M. E. Hill, J. C. Purdy, and R. T. Wilcox
1967 Identification of the Geologic Origins of Archaeological Artifacts:
An Automated Method of Na and Mn Neutron Activation Analysis.
Archaeometry, Vol. 10, pp. 87-96.
Gordus, Adon A., James B. Griffin, and Gary A. Wright
1971 Activation Analysis Identification of the Geologic Origins of
Prehistoric Obsidian Artifacts. Science and Archaeology, Fourth
Symposium on Archaeological Chemistry, Atlantic City, 1968. ed.
by Robert H. Brill, pp. 222-234, MIT Press.
Harbottle, G.
1970Neutron Activation Analysis of Potsherds from Knossos and
Mycenae. Archaeometry, Vol. 12, Part 1, pp. 23-34.
Meyers, Thomas and Mark Denier
1972 LONGTERM and SPEKSCAN: Neutron Activation Analysis Computer Programs. The University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology Technical Reports, No. 2, Ann Arbor.
Nie, Norman H., C. Hadlai Hull, Jean G. Jenkins, Karin Steinbrenner, and
Dale H. Bent
1975 Statistical Package for the Social Sciences. McGraw-Hill, New
York.
Perlman, I. and Frank Asaro
1971 Pottery Analysis by Neutron Activation. Science and Archaeology,
Fourth Symposium on Archaeological Chemistry, Atlantic City,
1968. ed. by Robert H. Brill, pp. 182-194, MIT Press.
Rummel, R. J.
1967 Understanding Factor Analysis. The Journal of Conflict Resolution.
Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 444-480.
Runyan, John W. and John A. Hendrick
1973 Pottery Types of the SWFAS Area. Transactions of the Eighth
Regional Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico
and Western Texas, pp. 19-45, Publication of the Lea County
Archaeological Society, Inc., Hobbs, New Mexico.
Sabloff, Jeremy A.
1971 Comments on the Archaeological Background and Implications of
the Neutron Activation Analysis of Fine Paste Pottery. Science and
Archaeology, Fourth Symposium on Archaeological Chemistry,
Atlantic City, 1968, ed. by Robert H. Brill, pp. 180-181, MIT Press.
Shepard, Anna O.
1971 Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnigie Institution of Washington,
Publication 609, {Seventh Printing), Washington, D.C.
Wright, Rebecca
Ms. Neutron Activation Analysis on Pottery. Unpublished manuscript in
the files of the Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas.

NOTES
A POLYCHROME VESSEL FROM GOLIAD COUNTY,
SOUTHERN TEXAS
ANNE A. FOX

AND W. S. FITZPATRICK

ABSTRACT
A polychrome, bone tempered vessel embellished with a trailed and
punctated motif is described. The vessel bears characteristics of both
Goliad and Rockport wares and the implications of these mixed
attributes as to the origin of the potter are discussed.

In 1974 W.S. Fitzpatrick of Corpus Christi, Texas, sent a
collection of ceramic sherds to Dr. Thomas R. Hester of The
University of Texas at San Antonio for analysis. The sherds had
been found some years previously on the south bank of the San
Antonio River two or three miles upstream from Mission Rosario.
Since the decoration on the vessel represented by the sherds
appears to be unlike that reported from other sites in the area, the
vessel will be documented fully here for the information of others
who are interested in ceramics from south Texas aboriginal and
mission sites.
DESCRIPTION
The collection consists of 64 sherds from a single vessel (see Fig.

1). No information is available on whether there was other
artifactual material present on the site. It has been possible to
restore enough of the vessel to reconstruct the original shape and
to estimate its dimensions (Fig. 2). The following data have been

obtained from examination of the sherds:
Shape: small, wide-mouthed jar with globular body and rounded
bottom
Method of manufacture: coiled construction
Approximate height: 19 cm
Diameter at rim: 14.5 cm.
Maximum diameter of body: 16 cm
Wall thickness: neck, 4 cm; base, 5 to 6 cm
Rim: flat, with closely spaced notches, giving a serrated appearance
(Fig. 1)
Paste texture: very fine, 1/8 to 1/16 mm
Temper: tiny flecks of white and gray bone
Finish: exterior, smoothed with fine, vertical striations on neck;
interior, crudely smoothed with overlapping coils visible on neck,
numerous fingernail impressions lumpy areas, and random striations.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

134

0

5

I

I

cm

d

C
o
I

!

!

cm

I

I

5

3

f

2
:,:, I
cm

FIGURE 1. Sherds of Vessel from Goliad County. a, portion of neck
showing incised decoration and notched rim; b, body sherd with
asphaltum on exterior; c, basal sherd with incised lines; d,
enlargement of incised decoration (approximately 4 times actual
size). Note varying scales.

POLYCHROME VESSEL FROM GOLIAD COUNTY

135

~ max. 4 cm

red painted lines

II

?

max. 6 cm

1

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Color: exterior, reddish-brown (5YR 6/4) to pinkish-gray (5YR 6/2)
with dark gray fire clouds on body and base; interior, uniformly reddishbrown; core of most sherds is dark to light gray.
Surface treatment: double incised vertical lines containing punctations
from rim to near base, barely visible red lines parallel to incised lines,
traces of asphaltum in no particular pattern, probably accidental or the
result of crack mending (Fig. 1,b).

DISCUSSION
In general, this vessel fits the description by Mounger (1959: 164165) for the bone tempered Goliad wares, in all details except
decoration. Its shape, size and proportions are similar to those of
vessels she describes from Mission Espiritu Santo seven miles
downstream from the site where the vessel was found (ibid.: 166).
However, the surface treatment appears to be unique. Campbell
(1962: 334) in his summary of Mounger’s type descriptions,
indicates that Goliad Red-on-buff often bears broad, vertical,
widely spaced lines in a dull red paint. The red lines barely visible
on the vessel in question are neither broad nor widely spaced. The
incised decoration, apparently made while the clay was still quite
wet, was accomplished by alternately pulling and jabbing a stick or
reed 1.5 mm in diameter along the surface of the vessel, probably
from the rim down the neck and onto the body. Also present are
short pairs of similar lines on the body of the vessel (Fig. 1). There
is not enough of the vessel present to determine the pattern, but
the design appears to repeat three or four times around the vessel.
This type of trailed and punctated design has not been reported
previously on any type of Texas ware. However, Gilmore illustrates
sherds of Goliad Black-on-buff with a single line of punctations
extending downward from the rim from Mission Rosario (1975:117
and Fig. 35, E and G), and Campbell (1962: 332) indicates that
punctations are occasionally found on Rockport Black-on-gray
vessels.
The rim treatment in this case is unusual, not in form but in the
execution of the notching. A tradition of rim notching is well known
on Rockport wares (Suhm and Jelks 1962: 135, 136L), but the
notches on this vessel are much closer together than any the senior
author has seen.
It appears that we have in this one small jar an unusual blending
of Goliad and Rockport traditions. Since there exists no information
about other materials from the site, we can only speculate on the
possible origins of vessel and potter. There are indications in the
collections of sherds from the Goliad missions that Goliad ware was

POLYCHROME VESSEL FROM GOLIAD COUNTY

137

occasionally decorated in a manner reminiscent of Rockport Blackon-gray (Campbell 1962: 334). It appears that in the case of the
Fitzpatrick vessel, the vertical lines of punctations and rim
notching may have been inspired by similar, though not identical,
designs the potter may have known from his or her own
experience, or observed on Rockport wares brought into the
missions. The workmanship of the vessel, the thin walls and fine
textured paste, are suggestive more of Rockport wares than of the
thicker walls and coarser paste of Goliad wares, implying perhaps
a neophyte coastal potter working with local clays but in his own
tradition.
The location of the site on which the sherds was found is near
the trail from Mission Rosario to its ranch upstream (Forrestal
1931: 17). Goliad ware sherds have been found on a number of
other sites in Goliad and Karnes Counties. The Scarborough Site
(Calhoun 1966} contained two restorable jars of Goliad Plain
accompanied by chert tools in a campsite about 20 miles east of
Mission Rosario on a tributary of the San Antonio River. Another
site containing sherds of Goliad Plain plus typical Mexican made
ware used in the missions, was located approximately the same
distance upstream on the west bank of the San Antonio River
(ibid.). Undoubtedly many more such temporary campsites exist
along streams in southern Texas, where mission Indians stopped in
their travels between missions and on visits to other aboriginal
groups in the area.
In conclusion it was suggested that this small, well-made and
carefully decorated jar was made by an Indian in one of the Goliad
missions who had either been taught in or exposed to the coastal
pottery traditions (a phenomenon which probably also occurred in
the Goliad County area in late prehistoric times; cf. Hester and
Parker 1970: 21). It was probably accidentally broken during a trip
up the San Antonio River, perhaps to the Rosario ranch or to the
ranches or missions near San Antonio.

REFERENCES CITED

Calhoun, C. A.
1966 A Small Campsite near Kenedy, Texas. Newsletter of the Houston
Archeo!ogical Society, No. 18.
Campbell, T. N.
1962 Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Forrestal, Rev. P. P., translator
1931 The Solis Diary of 1767. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic
Historical Society, Vol. 1, No. 6.
Hester, T. R. and R. C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
40, pp. 1-24.

A PAINTED PEBBLE FROM A SITE ON THE
NUECES RIVER, SOUTHERN TEXAS
THOMAS R.

HESTER

ABSTRACT
A painted pebble from an archeological site on the Nueces River,
Zavala County, Texas, is documented. It represents the only known
occurrence of this artifact form in southern Texas. Comparative studies
indicate considerable similarity with the painted pebbles of the lower
Pecos region.

As a part of the 1975 Field Course in Archeology of The
University of Texas at San Antonio, an archeological reconnaissance was conducted on the Mangum Ranch (owned by Belton K.
Johnson) near La Pryor in Zavala County (Fig. 1). The eastern edge
of the ranch lies along the Nueces River; on a series of eroded
terraces west of the present river channel, a number of prehistoric
archeological sites were recorded.
At one site, M-2 (41 ZV 183), the author discovered a painted
pebble recently exposed by gullying action that had cut through
buried deposits. In addition to the painted pebble, a limited surface
collection at this large terrace occupation site produced a series of
Archaic period chipped stone artifacts, including dart points
(Marshal1, "Early Corner Notched," Matamoros), a Clear Fork tool,
preforms, cores, flakes and flake-blades, and a hammerstone made
on a cobble very similar to the painted example reported here.

FIGURE 1. Location of Zavala County, Southern Texas. The location
of the county is shown as a darkened rectangle.

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The painted pebble is illustrated in Fig. 2. It is made on an oval,
biconvex pebble of cherty limestone, gray-white in color. The
designs are in red and are painted (or at least survive) on one face.
Length of the specimen is 78 cm, maximum width is 59.5 cm,
maximum thickness is 22 cm, and it weighs 149.4 g.
The motifs, as shown in Figs. 2 and 3, consist of bilaterally
symmetrical pairs of curved and intertwined lines (the lines
average 2 mm in width). Linear and oval appendages are found on
the right side, and may have been present on the left, but that area
is badly eroded. There also appear to have been lines running up
the center of the pebble between, or perhaps connecting, the pair
of curved double lines. Again erosion has removed all but minor
traces of these lines. An artist’s rendering of the motifs (Fig. 3)
clearly depicts a tri-lobed motif in the lower left portion of the
pebble; if a similar motif was present on the opposite side, it has
been eroded away.
Specimens of this kind have not previously been reported from
southern Texas sites. Typically, southern Texas prehistoric sites
have not yielded any perishable cultural materials (other than
faunal debris and occasional artifacts of bone). The nearest
reported specimen comes from Kincaid Rockshelter, near Sabinal in
Uvalde County. T. N. Campbell (personal communication, February
1977) describes the specimen as being larger than the artifact from
41 ZV 183, with the painting barely visible. Campbell also notes
that the Kincaid specimen has closely parallel, partly overlapping
lines at one end "and looks a bit like certain specimens said to
have come from the lowest levels of Fate Bell and Eagle Cave."
In the lower Pecos region of southwest Texas, numerous painted
pebbles have been found in Archaic contexts in dry rockshelter
deposits (cf. Davenport and Chelf 1941; Parsons 1965a, b; Collins
1969).* The most comprehensive study is that of Davenport and
Chelf. They note (p. 3) that the dominant paint used on lower Pecos
specimens is black, with red the second most common color. They
describe most of the red paints as "ferrous pigments," derived
from ochre or hematite. While the residue on the painted pebble
from 41 ZV 183 has not been analyzed, I would guess that it has an
ochre base. Although the designs on the Zavala County specimen
are rather faint, comparison shows them to be somewhat similar,
though by no means identical, to those found on several lower

*Occasional painted pebbles are also found in central and west central Texas (cf.
Field 1956: Jelks 1962; Shafer 1971).

PAINTED PEBBLE FROM NUECES RIVER

crn

FIGURE 2. Painted Pebble from 41 ZV 183.

141

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Pecos painted pebbles (cf. Davenport and Chelf 1941: Pls. VIII, 1;
XlII, 3).
While it is beyond the scope of this brief note to explore the
meaning or interpretation of painted pebbles it has been suggested
that they represent anthropomorphic figures, probably females (cf.
Davenport and Chelf 1941: 5-6; Parsons 1965a: 154; Parsons ms.:
39). A thorough review of this interpretation, and other theories, is
found in Shafer (1975: 11-13).

FIGURE 3. Artist’s Sketch of Painted Pebble from 41 ZV 183.

PAINTED PEBBLE FROM NUECES RIVER

143

The significant aspect of the painted pebble from 41 ZV 183 is
not its mere occurrence. Rather, it sheds new light on the material
culture of the prehistoric populations of the southern Texas coastal
plain. Most often, archeologists working in this area have to deal
solely with chipped and ground stone tools which have survived the
ravages of time. Yet we know from ethnohistoric accounts (cf.
Ruecking 1955) that the native populations had an extensive
cultural inventory consisting of artifacts fashioned of wood, plant
fibers, and other perishables. Ornaments made of shell have been
briefly reported from some sites (cf. Hester 1971), but other forms
of "art" have not been documented until this
point out in closing that a pictograph site was
1974 UTSA Field Course in Archaeology along
Webb County (author’s notes, on file at the
Archaeological Research). It is hoped that this
be published in the near future.

time. I should also
documented by the
the Rio Grande in
UTSA Center for
important site can

REFERENCES CITED

Collins, M. B.
1969 Test Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir, Fall, 1967.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 16.
Davenport, I. W. and C. Chelf
1941 Painted Pebbles of the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of
Texas. Witte Memorial Museum, Bulletin No. 5.
Field, A.
1956 Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet, Llano and San
Saba Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 27, pp. 161-184.
Hester, T. R.
1971 Marine Shells from Archeological Sites in Southwestern Texas.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 87-88.
Jelks, E. B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill
County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 5, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Parsons, M. L.
1965a Painted and Engraved Pebbles. In: The Archeology of Eagle Cave
(R. E. Ross). Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No.
7.
1965b 1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers, Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 4.
ms. Painted Pebbles:
A
Stylistic and Chronological
Analysis.
Unpublished manuscript.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ruecking, F., Jr.
1955 The Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. Unpublished MA thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Shafer, H. J.
1971 Investigations into South Plains Prehistory, West Central Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 20.
1975 Functional Interpretations of the Lower Pecos Archaic Art. Paper
presented at the conference "Prehistory of Northeast Mexico and
Texas," Monterrey, N. L., Mexico.

WATER SEPARATION PROCEDURES AT THE 1076
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY FIELD
SCHOOL: AN APPRAISAL OF RESULTS
JOHN

E.

KELLER AND BRUCE B. FULLEM

ABSTRACT
An apparatus for flotation separation used at the Texas Archeological
Society Musk Hog Canyon field school is described. The methods used in
processing the matrix samples from archeological contexts and the
results of the experiment are presented.

INTRODUCTION
During the 1976 Texas Archeological Society field school at
Musk Hog Canyon, the authors carried out water separation
experiments with some of the excavated samples. Our investigations were oriented toward several related, but nevertheless
separate, goals: the collection of a floral sample and an evaluation
of the methods by which this can be accomplished. In addition, we
wished to evaluate the feasibility of conducting an extensive
flotation operation for the archeological work to be conducted
along the right-of-way of IH 10 in western Crockett County.
The basic principle behind the water separation technique, that
lighter-than-water materials such as plant remains can be
separated by floating from soil and other heavier-than-water site
constituents, is well understood. In fact, descriptions of the
techniques and equipment are abundant in recent archeological
literature (Jarman et al. 1972; Struever 1968; Davis and
Wesolowsky 1976; Limp 1974; Watson 1976).

APPARATUS
The ultimate design of our equipment had more to do with
available materials and resultant construction requirements than
with any preconceived plan. The basic component of our apparatus
(Figure 1) is an open fiberglass tank measuring approximately 60
inches (152.5 centimeters)by 21 inches (53.5 centimeters). A
central baffle of fiberglass and plywood (metal or plastic would be

equally effective) serves to separate this tank into two approximately equal chambers. The first of these, the "riot chamber" (A) is
connected to the water supply by means of an external garden hose
fitting (B) and a controllable gate valve (C). The interior of the

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

chamber contains an appropriate amount of pipe and an upward
directed showerhead (D} through which the chamber is filled and
the water agitated. A removable wooden stand (E) which serves to
support a fine mesh screen "riot box" (F) completes the first
chamber arrangements. The "riot chamber" is connected with the
second or collection chamber (H} by means of a fiberglass covered
spillway {G), which allows for removal of the floating or light
fraction by moving water. The spillway is directed into a smallmesh, #20, gramametric screen (I), which collects the sample and
allows for water run off. Drainage from the collection chamber is
provided by a number of strategically placed holes (J).
During the course of our experimentation, we noted that the
amount of agitation seemed rather important in sample collection.
This was in substantial agreement with the literature on the
subject and as a result, we added a further variation to the
apparatus. Since agitation can be accomplished by forced air and
water, we decided that a second hose with a controllable nozzle
might provide sufficient water movement. Accordingly, a second
hose was connected to the water source and this was used to inject
a forceful jet of air and water into the "riot chamber". This
injection resulted in a marked increase in agitation and the
associated frothing producing an observable increase in the size of
the sample collected.
An ample supply of water is obviously necessary for the proper
operation of the device. Our water source was the Pecos River
from which water was taken by means of a three-horsepower
centrifugal pump with a fine mesh gauze covered intake. This
arrangement supplied ample quantities of filtered water at
sufficient pressure to allow operation of the showerhead and
agitation nozzle simultaneously.
Flotation samples were removed during the course of the
excavation by means of trowel and placed directly into cloth sacks.
Each sample contained approximately 12 quarts and was brought
to the flotation tank for processing within 24 hours.

METHODS
Our first goal in using the flotation device was to evaluate its
performance and to determine what alterations were needed.
The flotation procedure was varied to accommodate the various
field objectives (ex. whether or not carbon samples were to be
taken). In all, six variations were tried using various combinations
of air, water, and kerosene.

WATER SEPARATION AT 1976 T.A.S. FIELD SCHOOL

FLOTATION

147

TANK

TOP
O

!! !!~
TO PUMP

O

OUTLET

iiill
I

I

SIDE

TO PUMP

-xd-*

A

"Flat"

B

Hose

Fitting

C

Gate

Valve

D

Showerheod

E

Removeoble

F

"Fiat"

FIGURE

~

Fitting

Stand

Box

Spillway

H
I
d

~

Collection

Chamber

Gromametric

Drainage

.... "~’ Water

matrix.

Chamber

G

20

OUTLET

Screen

I~

Stand

Holes

Path

1. Apparatus for flotation separation for archeological

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1) WATER
2) WATER & AIR
3) WATER & KEROSENE
4) WATER, KEROSENE & AIR
5) WATER & SOAK KEROSENE
6) WATER, SOAK KEROSENE & AIR
In cases where carbon 14 material is to be retrieved, the process is
restricted to water only with two possible alternatives.
In west Texas during the summer, there is no reason to attempt
drying of the soil anymore than it is naturally. This being the case,
it was decided to handle the soil as little as possible and therefore,
it was not dry screened. This did not seem to cause any difficulty
in processing the samples. It should be added that our samples
were kept to a six quart size. This was accomplished by dividing
the original samples and running them twice, so an evaluation
could be made of the various methods. With the use of water only,
a sample was poured in slowly while the operator stirred the soil
and water. This in connection with the below-surface shower head
produced considerable agitation and the flow of water and dirt
allowed sufficient overflow to carry all floating or nearly floating
material down the spillway.
The second alternative also used no chemical additives thus
allowing C’4 samples to be taken. Attempting to duplicate the effect
described by Jarman at el. (1972), the second hose with the
agitation nozzle was used. By injecting a jet stream of water into
the tank with the end of the hose several inches above the surface,
a tremendous amount of air is added as well. This produces not
only a greater in and out flow of water, but a vigorous bubbling
action accompanied by a froth. The occurrence of a froth without
chemical additives is particularly useful when C" samples are
desired.
When C" samples are not to be recovered, the use of a collector
has been recommended (Jarman et el. 1972). Two methods of
application were utilized and both were tried with and without the
air and froth action. This provided four additional variations to
evaluate. First, the collector (kerosene) was added in the amount of
less than one-half cup and then the soil was added as before. This
is considerably more kerosene than Jarman et ol. (ibid.) used, but
our machine has a constant flow of water which carries off much
of the kerosene. The second technique was to presoak the sample
in herosene for five minutes while still in the sack, thus allowing a
much greater time for the collector to work. Both of these

WATER SEPARATION AT 1976 T.A.S. FIELD SCHOOL

!49

techniques are potentially harmful to the environment and
adequate kerosene disposal methods should be employed.
All of these methods worked quickly, but the bubbling action was
the fastest and seemed most efficient. A sample could be run and
the tank purged to avoid contamination in ten minutes. If samples
were from the same feature and purging was not necessary,
samples could be run in less than two minutes.

RESULTS
It is not possible to assume equal light fraction contents for all
samples. Therefore, comparisons between samples are not valid.
However, the samples were divided in half, permitting two methods
on each sample and by this means, comparisons can be made
between two parts of the same sample.
Without the forced air, the light fraction from the water-only
method out-weighed the kerosene methods in 75 percent of the
cases. When forced air was used, the water and kerosene method
proved to be most effective. In comparing samples run with and
without the forced air, it was found that the air increased the
weight of the light fraction.
After our return to Austin, we ran two more samples to check
the results with a different water source. The density of water
from the Pecos River [perhaps due to salinity) (Lange and Carty
1975) is significantly greater than water from less arid regions and
this could change the effectiveness of the collector. These check
samples were divided into thirds and each of the three methods
with air were employed. The results are given in ratio form -water: soak kerosene: kerosene - 1:1.25; 1.50 and 1:1.29: 1.29.
The results indicate that the largest returns are given when
forced air and a small amount of kerosene are used. If C’4 samples
are to be taken, then the use of forced air and water is
recommended. It is also possible and practical to process a large
number of samples with a realistic hope of gaining useful
information. While no quantitative statements can be made about
the types of material recovered, as this was not the purpose of this
experiment, there were botanical remains identified and they
include seeds of luglans, Celtis, Quercus, cactus and Acacia.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Davis, E. Mott and W. B. Wesolowsky
1976 The Izam: A Simple Water Separation Device. Journal of Field
Archaeology, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 271-273.
Jarman, H. N., A. J. Legge and J. A. Charles
1972 Retrieval of Plant Remains from Archaeological Sites by Froth
Flotation. In Papers in Economic Prehistory (edited by E. S. Legge),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, pp. 39-48.
Lange, F. W. and F. M. Carry
1975 Salt Water Application of the Flotation Technique. Journal of Field
Archaeology, Vol. 2, No. 1 & 2, pp. 119-123.
Limp, F. W.
1974Water Separation and Flotation Processes. Journal of Field
Archaeology, Vol. 1, pp. 337-342.
Munson, P. J., P. W. Parmalee and R. A. Yarnell
1971 Subsistence Ecology of Scovell, a Terminal Middle Woodland
Village. American Anthropologist, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 410-431.
Struever, Stuart
1968 Flotation Techniques
for
the Recovery of Small-Scale
Archaeological Remains. American Anthropologist, Vol. 33, No. 3,
pp. 353-362.
Watson, Patty Jo
1976 In Pursuit of Prehistoric Subsistence: A comparative account of
some contemporary flotation techniques. Mid-Continental Journal of
Archaeology, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 77-100.

[N MEMORIAM

DAVID ESPY
David Espy, a longtime resident of
Corpus Christi and a co-founder of the
Coastal Bend Archeological Society, died
on March 27, 1977.
Dave was "Mr. Fix-It" at a half-score
of TAS Field Schools. No camp task was
too menial for him -- and who can
forget his stringing wire and building
sheds to provide a more commodious
campsite for all of us amateur and
professional archeologists.
Generosity, selflessness, warmth, and
friendship characterized Dave. He
seemed ageless, treating all who shared
his avid interest in archeology alike. He
taught the young, seeing them as peers;
surveyed sites with the experienced,
viewing them and himself as students in
a remarkably fertile field.
Dave Espy was mentor, colleague,
sharer, and friend. We will miss him.
The Members
Coastal Bend Archeological Society

IN MEMORIUM
M. MALONE
1923-1977

JAMES

The archeological community of Texas was indeed saddened by
the news of the death of Jim Malone. At the time of his death Jim
was Assistant State Archeologist with the Texas Historical
Commission, a position he had held since 1971.
A native of West Texas, Jim received a B.A. degree in economics
from The University of Texas in 1948. He attended the University of
Chicago to pursue graduate studies in economics in 1949. After
three years in the United States Air Force, he served seventeen
years with the United States Diplomatic Service. He returned to
Austin in the mid-1960’s to continue his graduate studies and
received a M.A. degree in anthropology in 1969. Jim joined the staff
of the State Archeologist’s Office in 1968 as a research
archeologist.
His recent research projects have included an intensive study of
historic Texas stoneware pottery kilns and lime kilns along with a
cooperative project for long range preservation of Indian
pictographs. In carrying out his duties as Assistant State
Archeologist he worked closely with various agencies and local
archeological and historical societies in the preservation of Texas’
cultural heritage.
He maintained active membership in various professional
organizations including the Society for American Archaeology,
Texas Archeological Society, Council of Texas Archeologists, and
the Society of Professional Archaeology. Jim also maintained
conservation-related interests outside his profession. For example,
he was a member of the Audobon Society, the Garden Club and the
Creation of Wild Basin Park.
In Jim’s short professional career in archeology, he made
significant and lasting contributions represented by various
publications, public lectures and documents. His concern for the
cultural heritage of Texas and his intense dedication toward the
conservation goals for these resources was an inspiration to those
who knew and worked with him.

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bibliography of James M. Malone
1969

1970

1970

1970

1972

Report on the Excavation and Analysis of A Prehistoric Site
in Liberty County, Texas: The Price Daniel Site (41 LB 3}.
M.A. thesis, The University of Texas, Austin.
Archeological Reconnaissance in Miller Creek Reservoir
area, by James M. Malone and Alton K. Briggs.
Archeological Survey Report 6, Texas State Historical
Survey Committee and Texas Water Development Board,
Austin.
An Archeological survey of the Texarkana Reservoir
Enlargement area: Report on the first season, by Alton K.
Briggs and James M. Malone. Archeological Survey Report 7,
Texas Historical Survey Committee and Texas Water
Development Board, Austin.
Archeological Reconnaissance in the Mackenzie Reservoir
Area of Tule Canyon. Archeological Survey Report 8, Texas
Historical Survey Committee and Texas Water Development
Board, Austin.
Archeological
reconnaissance
at
proposed
Mineola
Reservoir. Archeological Survey Report 10, Texas Historical
Survey Committee and Texas Water Development Board,
Austin.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to thank Curtis D. Tunnell and Alton K. Briggs for providing
information on the accomplishments and careers of James Malone.

Harry J. Shafer
Anthropology Laboratory
Texas A&M University

BOOK REVIEWS

"Archeological Investigations at Proposed Big Pine Lake, 19741975, Lamar and Red River Counties, Texas." by Robert J.
Mallouf. Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey
Report 18. $10.00.
This handsomely designed and massive report presents the results
of one season’s investigations within the proposed Big Pine Lake
located east of Paris, Texas and near the western edge of the Early
Caddoan geographical area. The study was sponsored by the U. S.
Army Corps of Engineers in Tulsa, Oklahoma and was done in order to
meet the needs of a Phase II study which involved extensive testing.
This is a followup to a Phase I reconnaissance investigation conducted in 1972 by Robert D. Hyatt then of the Archaeology Research
Program at Southern Methodist University. The reconnaissance
recorded 110 sites and recommended that 19 be tested in order to
evaluate their significance and to test a settlement model that was
then proposed.
The present study is a good example of the long range planning that
can be incorporated into construction plans when archeologists and
land modification planners work in concert. The purpose of the Phase
II study was to provide a complete cultural resources inventory, to
determine depth and areal extent of tested sites, to evaluate site
significance, to test the proposed settlement model, and to make
recommendations for additional investigations and mitigation
measures to be conducted before construction is completed.
After a few introductory remarks, the report presents a description
of the environmental setting of the project area. Environmental zones
are refined from those used in the reconnaissance report and are
used later in describing site distributions. A brief discussion of the
ethnohistory and archeological background of the area is followed by
a two page description of methodology. The next section describes the
sources and kinds of stone types found at the sites. The following 370
pages are primarily site descriptions that include discussions and
preliminary interpretations of cultural stratigraphy, features and
material culture. The A. C. Mackin site, a prehistoric Caddoan mound
site and the Neely site complex, an Early Ceramic and Early Caddoan
village, make up almost 300 of these pages. A brief description of the
seven minimally tested sites, Mackin and Neely were extensively
tested, and a short description of the previously unrecorded sites (9)

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are included in this section. Throughout the report, artifacts receive
extensive attention although lithic debris and heat altered rock are
only discussed for the Mackin and Neely sites. The summary section
contains a thorough discussion of the chronological and typological
affiliations of the sites and also proposes several settlement models
for the different horizons recognized in the project area. Suggestions
are made about further investigations, an interpretive center,
mitigation procedures and estimated costs. Three appendices are
included. These are a soil analysis and interpretation of four sites, a
vegetational survey, and the specimen proveniences for the Mackin
and Neely sites.
The report is profusely illustrated with a total of 166 figures. Many
of these figures are maps and diagrams which have more artistic
flare than the usual run of the mill archeological site map. Several
wel! executed artifact drawings of ceramics and of the bipolar
reduction sequence are included. Unfortunately some of the artifacts
were photographed and the lighting did not bring out flake scar
patterns as do the line drawings. The only other drawback with the
illustrations is that several of the site maps have field information
that is unnecessary on published maps since the information is not
used in the body of the report. Nevertheless the report is tastefully
and extensively illustrated.
The report provides a valuable synthesis of the understanding of
prehistoric occupation in the Big Pine Creek area of the Red River
drainage and will be an important reference for Caddoan
archeologists working in this area for years to come. It presents
problems that future investigators can use to guide research. The
most important new perspective that the study offers is the
systematic evaluation of sources of raw material used for chipped
stone tools. This has been a descriptive facet of lithic studies in
Oklahoma for many years but this report presents the first recent
attempt to determine if such information can be gathered from sites
in east Texas. The answer is affirmative as shown early in the
monograph and I hope that other researchers will follow the lead
of Mallouf and Larry Banks of the Corps of Engineers in
incorporating source studies into field research. An area of further
development would be to present the morphological and
technological aspects of the lithic debris as they cross-cut the
various raw material types. This would provide another means of
evaluating variations in the movement of raw materials and should
lead to a better understanding of trade patterns.
One of the important discoveries of this research is that the
project area, which is a minor tributary of the Red River, was

BOOK REVIEWS

157

abandoned by the prehistoric Caddoan inhabitants sometime
between A.D. 1275 and 1350. This is a period of change
throughout the Caddoan area, much of Texas and the Southwest.
The Cooper Lake area just to the south was abandoned at this time
and elsewhere in the Neches, Sabine, and Cypress Creek
watersheds there appear to be corresponding settlement pattern
shifts. Early Caddoan sites tend to be located along major
drainages while the smaller but more numerous late prehistoric
Caddoan sites are located near the headwaters of smaller
tributaries. A somewhat different pattern is apparent in parts of
the Red River basin where large sites remain present along the
major drainage and in some cases smaller hamlets sites are located
at the headwaters of minor tributaries as represented by the
Bossier Focus. The Big Pine Lake information when combined with
data from the region should allow a better explanation of changes
in the natural and cultural environments.
A concern for public interest in archeology is shown through the
development of plans for an interpreti,¢e center involving the A. C.
Mackin mound site. This interest is to be expected from the Texas
Historical Commission which has a responsibility for site
preservation and is encouraging to see on the part of the Corps of
Engineers. This is one way that archeologists can present the
results of their investigations to the public. Similar interpretive
approaches need to be encouraged as projects elsewhere develop.
The report suffers from a lack of organization in that several
sections do not integrate well with the conclusions. This is
particularly true of the raw material section but is also true of the
environmental description which is presented without any
explanation of why it is described or how it is expected to be used
later in the report. Overall the report flows from data gathering
and description to summary and conclusions without explaining the
rationale behind why the reported data were gathered or why they
are presented as they are. In part it seems that this format is a
reflection of a strategy that attempted to "... maximize data
recovery within limits imposed by time and budgeting... (pg. 39)"
but it also seems that it is a reflection that an explicit research
design did not guide the study. At least I was unable to find a
developed statement of the "whys" that guided the methodology
that is described in the report. This is not to say that the
conclusions of the study are meaningless, for they are important,
but it is to indicate my belief that a comprehensive research design
should have allowed the researchers to have further maximized
data recovery for the satisfaction of the needs of the Corps of
Engineers and of Caddoan archeologists.

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The reviewer is unclear about the reliability of the site evaluation of the seven minimally tested sites. In most cases one or two
test pits and an unstated number of shovel tests were used to evaluate site depth, area, and significance. It is impossible, except in
the case of site X41LR48 {Fig. 154}, to know the location of the
shovel tests and be able to determine their relationship to the delimitation of site areas as presented in Table 18. No explanation is
provided about why single test pits rather than other forms of site
sampling such as plowing/surface collection, systematic or random
test pitting, or other subsurface evaluation approaches were not
used.
The sampling approach used also raises the question of the
reliability of the results from one or two test pits. An examination
of the artifact assemblages from the tested sites shows that the
samples are small in number (ranging from 12 to 39 pieces including stone tools and pottery} or appear to be biased (as in the case
of the Emerson site where the entire assemblage consists of 382
pieces of pottery}. Unfortunately lithic debris from these sites is not
reported and cannot be used to augment assemblages for comparative purposes. Although no formal statistical comparison of these
assemblages is made in the report, it is hard to believe that the
reported information is sufficient to adequately evaluate models of
settlement, chronology, or lifeway or to determine which of the
tested sites is significant. In retrospect I wonder if Mallouf remains
convinced that a sufficient number of sites and sufficient amount of
testing per site has been done. While it is true that the Federal
guidelines for determining site significance are very general, it
behooves us to refine our evaluation tools beyond these limits if we
are going to make our archeology relevant to the public. The
problem of site evaluation is not unique to this report and contract
archeologists need to become ever increasingly sensitive to this as
a problem wherever they are working.
The Big Pine Lake report shows how masses of information can
be derived from a limited amount of field investigation, unfortunately the masses could have been more thoroughly integrated. The
report is long and contains a wealth of information that will be
used for many years to come. The report presents important data
from an early Caddoan mound center which is located on a minor
tributary of the Red River along with the results of the testing of
nine other prehistoric sites spanning the period from Late PaleoIndian to the end of the Early Caddoan period. The study shows by
example the value of the analysis of stone resource areas. The
absence of a formal research design and of a discussion of site

BOOK REVIEWS

159

evaluation techniques is unfortunate but the report still concludes
by offering statements about prehistoric settlement/subsistence
patterns in the area. This can, and I hope will, be used by future
investigators to expand our understanding of prehistory on the
western fringe of the Caddoan area.
S. Alan Skinner
Archaeology Research Program
Southern Methodist University

Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School: Analysis of
Galveston Bay Area Mortuary Practices. Special Publication No.
3, The Texas Archeological Society, Austin. 1976. 112 pp. $8.50
Special Publication No. 3 of the Texas Archeological Society
provides a useful synopsis of the prehistoric mortuary practices in
the Galveston Bay area. The report also describes, in considerable
detail, the research conducted at an aboriginal cemetery (41HR80) on
the grounds of the Harris County Boys’ School and correlates some
stratigraphic testing of a midden area (41HR80) which is immediately
adjacent to the cemetery. Lawrence E. Aten supervised most of the
field work at the Boys’ School Cemetery and is the report’s principal
author. Charles Chandler collaborated with Aten in a chapter on the
description and analysis of recovered artifactual materials, and A1
Wesolowsky and Robert Malina contributed a short chapter on the
recovered human skeletal remains and that skeletal materials’
implication for aboriginal demography.
The Boys’ School Cemetery is located on Mud Lake near the
western edge of Galveston Bay and was first reported in 1968 by
Richard Gramley, whose brief excavations encountered 12 burials.
Aten later excavated the site on four separate occasions between
May 1969 and April 1972 for a total of 30 working days.
The entire collection of skeletal materials from the Boys’ School
Cemetery represents 32 individuals of which 29 were found in situ.
Most of the interments were of the flexed variety; and, as a whole, the
cemetery does not seem to be age or sex specific. The ages of the
deceased individuals are interpreted to vary from less than 6 months
to more than 40 years of age, and of 23 individuals classified as

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

adults, 19 were also classified as to sex, representing 12 males and
seven females.
Grave goods were present with some of the burials but were
certainly not abundant. Associated variously with 12 of the 29
documented burials were beads, fishhooks, awls, bone projectile
points, dice, flageolets, red ochre and shells. Additionally, one infant
appears to have been buried in a ceramic vessel. Aten (p. 61, 96) notes
that there appears to be a correlation between the grave goods and
the sex of the interment that might suggest a sexual division of labor,
but cautions that the limited data makes such assumption tenuous.
In addition to the human interments, the site contained a
considerable amount of midden refuse. In analyzing the data,
particularly the lithic and ceramic technologies and some of the
stratigraphic components, Aten (p. 51, 56-57) makes the convincing
case that burials are relatively later than most of the midden refuse.
He believes that the bulk of occupation was preceramic and probably
extended through the Clear Lake Period with regular habitation of the
site ending around A. D. 600. He believes the graves were excavated
from the present ground surface through Clear Lake and perhaps
Mayes Island Period materials, and that the cemetery dates in some
portion of the Turtle Bay Period, roughly in the time span of A. D. 600
to A. D. 950.
A significant portion of the report is devoted to the description of
cemeteries and mortuary data in the Galveston Bay area other than
the Boys’ School material. Much of this material is a result of Aten’s
review of old field notes and from his own research into the area.
Some of the data is in print for the first time and provides a wider
archeological spectrum for understanding the Boys’ School material.
Aten specifically reviews information from the Caplen Cemetery,
Jamaica Beach Cemetery, isolated burial localities, nongrave
occurrences of human skeletal remains and speculates on the
nonoccurrence of burials.
The Boys’ School Cemetery report stands as an important
reference in understanding the mortuary practices and prehistory of
the north Texas coast. Much of the data is appearing in print for the
first time, and a number of stimulating hypotheses of cultural
dynamics can be generated from the presented data. Because of the
technical nature of much of the presented data it should be noted that
the report may not be suitable for casual reading.
Clell L. Bond
Anthropology Laboratory
Texas A&M University

THE AUTHORS

Clell L. Bond is currently employed as a Research Associate at Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas. He received his M.A. degree from
the University of Arkansas, where he concentrated his research in
the areas of lithic analysis and replicative experiments. Before
moving to Texas he served on the staff of the Arkansas Historic
Preservation Program for 3 years and as the Arkansas Highway
Department staff archeologist for 2 years. He has authored and coauthored several research reports, the most recent of which is "An
Archeological Assessment of the Gibbons Creek Steam Electric
Station" (Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M, Report No. 36).
Address: Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843.
Vaughn M. Bryant, lr. received his Ph.D. degree from The University of
Texas at Austin and is Associate Professor of Anthropology and
Botany at Texas A&M University. He has conducted research in the
areas
of palynology
and paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
Publications include "Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The
Coprolite Evidence" (American Antiquity, 1974), "The Role of
Coprolite Analysis in Archeology" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society 1974), and "The Coprolites of Man" (Scientific American
1974). Address: Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas 77843.
Carolyn Ekland received her B.A. degree at the University of Montana and
is presently working on the Ph.D. degree at the University of Texas at
Austin. Her research interests include cultural ecology, human and
animal modification of bone, and statistical analysis of archeological
data. Her current research deals with systems of exchange among
the prehistoric Caddo. Address: Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712.
W. S. Fitzpatrick is an amateur archeologist from Corpus Christi. He has
been active in the Texas Archeological Society for the past 30 years.
Mr. Fitzpatrick’s interest lies primarily in the Central Texas coastal
region; he is noted for his knowledge of late prehistoric coastal
ceramics. His publications include "A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel
from the Vicinity of Corpus Christi, Texas" with Joan Fitzpatrick and
T.N. Campbell (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 1964).
Address: 803 Wilson Tower, Corpus Christi, Texas 78401.
Anne A. Fox is a Research Associate at the Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. She has also
served as a Research Associate at Witte Museum in San Antonio.
She has been an active member of the Texas Archeological Society
and is a past editor of Texas Archeology. Her publications include
"Archeological Investigations at Fort Griffin State Historic Park,
Texas, February, 1972" (Texas Archeological Survey). Address: 106
Fawn Drive, San Antonio, Texas 78321.
Bruce Fullem is senior scientist for archeology in the New York State
Historic Preservation Office. He received his M.A. degree from the

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

University of Connecticut. As an archeologist for the Texas
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, he carried out
salvage field work throughout Texas, and has also done research in
Alaska, Cyprus, and New York State. His most recent publication is
"The Black Hopper Site" (Texas Highway Department Publications in
Archaeology 1977). Address: New York State Parks and Recreation,
Historic Preservation Bureau, Agency Building 1, Empire State Plaza,
Albany, New York 12238.
Thomas R. Hester is Associate Professor of Anthropology and Director of
the Center for Archaeological Research at The University of Texas at
San Antonio. He received his Ph.D. degree from the University of
California, Berkeley. Hester has carried out archeological work in
Texas and northeastern Mexico, the western United States, and
Egypt. Among his publications are Field Methods in Archaeology
(with R.F. Heizer and J.A. Graham, Palo Alto 1975) and "The
Obsidian Industry of Beleh (Guatemala}" (Actas, 41st International
Congress of Americanists 1975). Address: Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio,
Texas 78285.
Vance T. Holliday is the Assistant Field Supervisor for the Lubbock Lake
Project, Museum of Texas Tech University. He received his B.A.
degree with Honors from the University of Texas at Austin and his
M.A. in Museum Science from Texas Tech University. He has been
associated with the Lubbock Lake Project since 1973. Research
interests include Early Man in North America and Late Quaternary
Stratigraphy and Paleopedology. Address: The Museum, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, Texas 79409.
Eileen Johnson, Director of the Lubbock Lake Project at The Museum of
Texas Tech University, did her doctoral work on the zooarcheology of
the Lubbock Lake site. She has done field work throughout western
North America and is currently concentrating on the Llano Estacado.
Her major research interests are in Paleo Indian studies and
zooarcheology, including bone technology and Paleoenvironmental
reconstructions. Recent efforts include the editing and publication of
"Paleoindian Lifeways" (The Museum Journal 1977) and the
organization of a Bone Technology Symposium and editing of papers
for publication. Address: The Museum, Texas Tech University,
Lubbock, Texas 79409.
Michael J. Kaczor received his B.A. degree from Rutgers University and is
presently working toward a M.A. degree in Museum Science at
Texas Tech University. His work as a member of the Lubbock Lake
Project reflects his interests in hunter-gatherer subsistence and
settlement patterns (particularly Paleo Indian}, bone technology,
paleoecology, and geology. Address: The Museum, Box 4499, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 79409.
John E. Keller received his Ph.D. degree from the University of Texas at
Austin and is now Zonal Archeologist for the U.S.D.A. Forest Service,
with responsibility for forest lands in Arkansas, Louisiana,
Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Texas. He has conducted archeological
investigations throughout Texas, in England, Kentucky, Georgia,
Virginia, and Louisiana. He is the author of numerous monographs in

THE AUTHORS

163

the Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation
archeology series and other publications. His most recent article,
"Paleo-subsistence at George C. Davis: Strategies and Consequences," appeared in the special ecological issue of the Western
Canadian Journal of Anthropology. Address: 2500 Shreveport
Highway, Pineville, Louisiana 71360.
Jack G. Klatt is a geologist with Corpus Christi Oil and Gas Company in
Corpus Christi, Texas. He received his B.S. in zoology from the
University of Texas and a geological engineering degree from Tulsa
University. He is a long time member of the Texas Archeological
Society, has attended every field school since 1967, and presently
serves as a regional vice-president. Address: 326 Troy, Corpus
Christi, Texas 78412.
Leland W. Patterson is Chairman of the Houston Archeological Society. He
is an active amateur archeologist with major interests in the upper
coast and south-central regions of Texas. His research activities
include site survey, lithic technology, cultural change, and crosscultural comparisons. He has published a number of papers in the
Ohio Archaeologist, La Tierra, and the Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter, as well as several articles on lithic technology in other
journals. Address: 418 Wycliffe, Houston, Texas 77079.
Patience E. Patterson received her B.A. and M.A. degrees from the
University of Texas at Austin and has done archeological work in
central and southern Texas. She is the Contract Administrator with
the Arkansas Archeological Survey, University of Arkansas.
Publications include "Upper San Marcos River Watershed, Hays
County, Texas: An Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for
Modification" (Research Report No. 42, Texas Archeological Survey
1974). Address: Arkansas Archeological Survey, Coordinating Office,
University of Arkansas Museum, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701.
Mary Lucas Powell received her M.A. from the University of Arkansas
with a thesis which dealt with sampling problems in bioarcheological
research. Her other research activities include investigations of
nutritional stress and disease patterning in prehistoric hunter and
gatherer (Fourche Maline) and agricultural (Caddo, Mississippian)
Amerindian populations. She has done field work in Arkansas,
Oklahoma and Alabama. Her analyses of human skeletal material
from the Shallow Lake, Zebree and Ferguson sites will appear in
forthcoming reports by the Arkansas Archeological Survey. Address:
1535 South 19th Street, Birmingham, Alabama 35205.
Harry J. Sharer is Associate Professor of Anthropology and Coordinator of
the Archeological Research Laboratory at Texas A&M University. He
received his Ph.D. degree from The University of Texas at Austin and
has conducted archeological field work in many areas of Texas and
in Israel. His publications include a number of monographs in the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project series, and he is also the author
of "Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas" (American
Antiquity 1975) and "Comments on Woodland Cultures of East
Texas" (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 1975). Address:
Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

S. Alan Skinner is Director of the Archeological Research Program and
Assistant Professor of Anthropology at Southern Methodist
University. He received his B.A. degree from the University of New
Mexico and his Ph.D. degree from Southern Methodist University. He
has directed field work throughout Texas and the southwest, with
particular emphasis on settlement patterns. He is a past President of
the Dallas and Texas Archeological Societies and is concerned with
integrating the general public into archeological studies. Address:
Archeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas, Texas 75275.
J. B. Sollberger is an amateur archeologist with a major interest in
experimentation and interpretation in lithic technology. His
publications include "A Technological Study of Beveled Knives"
(Plains Anthropologist 1971) and "The Basic Tool Kit Required to
Make and Notch Arrow Shafts for Stone Points" (Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 1969). Address: 8515 Forest Hills Blvd.,
Dallas, Texas 75218.
Robert Stuckenrath, Director of the Radiocarbon Laboratory at the
Smithsonian Institution, holds J.D., M.S. (Archeology), and Ph.D.
(anthropology) degrees from the University of Pennsylvania. He has
done archeological and geological field work in Alaska, Pennsylvania,
Maine, Nova Scotia, and South Africa. His research interests include
the early peopling of the Americas, and much of his laboratory time
is spent investigating the relationships between changing environments and changing cultures. Address: Radiocarbon Laboratory,
Smithsonian Institution, 12441 Parklawn Drive, Rockville, Maryland
20852.

Information for Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the field
of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the United
States and Mexico, but papers on other areas will also be considered. Articles concerning archeo!ogical technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced, on 81/2 x 11 white paper. Footnotes should
be avoided or kept to a minimum. Reference to published literature, by author, date, and
page or figure number should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text, with
full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for examples.
Authors should also consult "Information for Authors", in Texas Archeology, Vol. 18,
No. 1 (January, 1974) or write to the Editors for a copy.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus captions) should be
suitable for reduction to the effective page size of the Bulletin of 41/4 x 7 inches. Plates
may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but allowance for the caption to be
printed the same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations should be listed in
numerical order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title page, an abstract, main body, references
cited, appendices (if necessary), figure captions, and completed photographic and
drafted plates. Only complete manuscripts will be considered.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in ABSTRACTS IN
ANTHROPOLOGY.
Manuscripts should be addressed to: Dr. Thomas R. Hester, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78285.

