BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society

Volume Four

SEPTEMBER
1932

Published
by the
Society at
Abilene,
Texas

The Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society
OFFICERS
CYRUS N. RAY, President
JULIUS OLSEN, Vice President
RUSSELL STEPHENS, Secretary-Treasurer
E. B. SAYLES, Corresponding Secretary

DIRECTORS
CYRUS N. RAY, D. O.
JULIUS OLSEN, Ph. D., Sc. D.
RUSSELL STEPHENS

W. C. HOLDEN, Ph. D.
OTTO O. WATTS, Ph. D.
RUPERT RICHARDSON
E. B. SAYLES

REGIONAL VICE PRESIDENTS
COL. M. L. CRIMMINS, El Paso
GEORGE C. MARTIN, Rockport
H. T. FLETCHER, Alpine
DR. J. E. PIERCE, Austin
FLOYD V. STUDER, Amarillo

HONORARY MEMBERS
DR. JOHN A. UDDEN, Austin*
HAROLD J. COOK, Agate, Nebraska
ALBERT G. INGALLS, New York, N. Y.

TRUSTEES
O. O. WATTS
C. A. HOWARD
DR. STEWART COOPER
W. R. ELY
W. A. RINEY
FRED COCKRELL
ERNEST W. WILSON
EDITED BY:
DR. CYRUS N. RAY
* Deceased

The editors acknowledge with
thanks the cooperation of the
ABILENE PRINTING & STATIONERY
COMPANY in printing this Bulletin
of the Society.

BULLETIN
of the

Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
CAVES ALONG THE SLOPES OF THE GUADALUPE MOUNTAINS,
by E. B. HOWARD ........................................................................................................................ 7
PAINTED PEBBLES OF THE TEXAS BIG BEND,
by GEORGE CASTOR MARTIN AND SAMUEL WOOLFORD .................................................................. 15
EXCAVATIONS AT TECOLOTE DURING THE SUMMER OF 1931,
by DR. W. C. HOLDEN ............................................................................................................... 18
ARTIFACTS OF THE RIO GRANDE DELTA REGION,
by A. E. ANDERSON ................................................................................................................... 21
THE

AZTEC INFLUENCE ON THE PRIMITIVE CULTURE OF THE SOUTHWEST,
by COL. M. L. CRIMMINS ........................................................................................................... 23

A SMALL RUIN IN NEW MEXICO,
by EILEEN E. ALVES ................................................................................................................... 27
THE PRESENT STATUS OF TEXAS ARCHAEOLOGY,
by DR. J. E. PEARCE .................................................................................................................. 30
THE RELATION OF THE SOUTHWESTERN BASKET MAKER TO THE DRY SHELTER CULTURE OF THE BIG BEND,
by VICTOR J. SMITH ................................................................................................................... 37
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH IN CENTRAL WEST TEXAS,
by DR. CYRUS N., RAY ............................................................................................................... 43
MUSEUM AND FIELD NOTES ..................................................................................................................... 48
SECRETARY-TREASURER’S REPORT ............................................................................................................ 53
LIST OF MEMBERS .................................................................................................................................. 54
Original Price $3.00
ABILENE, TEXAS

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Plate 1.

Page
No. 1, Burnet Cave; No. 2, Round Mortar Holes Near Carlsbad, N. M. ....................... 8

Plate 2.

No. 3, Basket Maker Twined Woven Bag Found in Cave............................................ 10

Plate 3.

No. 4, Generalized Folsom Type Spear Point ............................................................ 11

Plate 4.

Nos. 6 and 6, Shumla Cave Painted Pebbles;
7 and 8, European Paleolithic Painted Pebbles ........................................................... 16

Plate 5.

No. 9, Potsherds From Tecolote Ruin; No. 10 Artifacts From Tecolote Ruin ............ 18

Plate 6.

No. 11, Bone Artifacts From Tecolote Ruin;
No.12, Flint Artifacts From Tecolote Ruin .................................................................. 19

Plate 7.

Nos. 13, 14 and 16, Shell Beads, Tinklers, Pendants, Tubes, and Other Shell
Artifacts ...................................................................................................................... 21

Plate 8.

No. 16, Map of the Peregrinations of the Aztec Tribe in Mexico ................................ 24

Plate 9.

No. 17, Artifacts of Wood- No. 18 Chupadero Black on White Pottery ...................... 27

Plate 10.

No. 19, Artifacts of Upper Level Texas Kitchen Middens;
No. 20, Artifacts of the Middle Level;
No. 21, Artifacts of the Bottom Level.......................................................................... 31

Plate 11.

No. 22, Fire Keeping Device from Coast Burial;
No. 23 Caddo Bottles from Red River District;
No. 24, Fine Carved Shell Gorget from Caddo Area on Red River ............................ 35

Plate 12.

No. 26, Typical Big Bend Rock Shelter; No. 26,
Probably an Atl Atl; No. 27, Big Bend Throwing
Sticks of Basket Maker Type; No. 28 Coiled Basket................................................... 38

Plate 13.

No. 29, Six Warp Yucca Sandal; No. 30, Checker
Weave Yucca Sandal; No. 31, Two Fiber Bags;
No. 32, Unusual Soft Yucca Fiber Sandal.................................................................... 39

Plate 14

No. 33, Left Side Colorado, Texas, Skull; No. 34, Right Side of Same;
No. 35, Muzzle of Flexed Skeleton Found Near Abilene, No. 36, In Lower
Center, Lower Jaw of Colorado Skuil, Upper Right Grinding Surfaces of Jaws
Shown in Number Thirty-five ...................................................................................... 45

Plate 15.

No. 37, Profile View of Carved Image from Dallas Gravel Pit;
No. 38, Front View of Image ....................................................................................... 52

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

7

CAVES ALONG THE SLOPES OF THE GUADALUPE MOUNTAINS
BY E. B. HOWARD
In the little known Canyons of the Guadalupe
Mountains lie buried many secrets relating to the early
inhabitants of that region. To unlock some of these
secrets is, at times, a discouraging task but withal a
fascinating one. Many caves have to be examined
before one is found which shows evidences of human
occupation of sufficient interest to warrant the
necessary time and energy required to properly
excavate it.
In outlining the work done during the past two
seasons for the University Museum of Philadelphia, it
will be well, perhaps, to give some description of the
region which was explored for caves. The Guadalupe
Mountains are a southward extension of the
Sacramento Mountains and are largely located in
Otero and Eddy Counties in southeastern New
Mexico, and extending into Culberson County, Texas,
where Guadalupe Point terminates in an almost sheer
precipice of limestone 1500 to 1800 feet thick. The
highest peak rises to over 9000 feet. On the west
side are salt flats while on the east the land is cut up
by many canyons heading in a generally eastern
direction to the Pecos River.
The mountains themselves are formed of limestone,
though in some places alternating with gypsum and
sandstone. The country, like so much of the Southwest
presents the usual semi-arid appearance, there being
very few canyons which are not dry. How long this
area has been as dry as it now is would be hard to
say, but it seems to be generally believed that these
conditions have been of no short duration. Upon the
recession and shrinking of the great ice sheet which
covered a large part of this country during the last
glacial period, the climate of the desert regions
underwent considerable changes. The ice sheet
apparently was bordered by a belt with plants and
animals characteristic of the modern tundras or barren
grounds of the north. We shall refer to this later, and
must now go on to some description of the caves.
The caves in this region range in size from mere
shelters to the Carlsbad Cavern, the enormous size

and beauty of which is rapidly becoming familiar to
everyone. There are dry caves and caves in which
water-action is evident by the formation of stalactites
and stalagmites. The dry caves only are of interest to
us here, inasmuch as material recovered from them is
often found in the most remarkable state of
preservation; and in many cases indicate very early
occupancy. While some of these caves are found well
up the sides of the mountains most of those showing
the evidence we seek are found in the canyons cutting
the slopes of the mountains and at no very great height
above the beds of the canyons, probably from fifty to
a hundred feet. The three principal canyons in which
we worked are Last Chance, Anderson, which is a
small canyon running into Last Chance, and Three
Forks. Last Chance has running water in it at all times
while the other two are dry. The cave of chief interest
to us, to which we have given the name Burnet Cave,
after R. M. Burnet of Carlsbad, lies on the south fork
of Three Forks Canyon which is another name for the
upper reaches of Rocky Arroyo, this latter running into
the Pecos River above Carlsbad, New Mexico. Burnet
cave is nearly west of Carlsbad and is reached in a
roundabout trip of some fifty miles over ranch trails
for a good part of the way. (See No. 1 Plate 1). The
cave itself is about seventy feet above the bed of the
canyon and at an elevation of approximately 4,600
feet above sea-level. It is in the side of a spur which
extends into a small flat, on one side of which the bed
of the dry stream is cut, piling up rocks washed down
from above. The formation in which the cave is made
is a limestone of late Carboniferous Age, probably
representing a transitional stage into the early Permian.
There are a number of other caves in this same
formation most of them smaller than the one I am
describing. There are others also nearby across the
little flat, and only a few feet above it. In front of these
last mentioned caves are what are known locally as
mescal pits composed of mounds of burnt rock with
circular depressions. These are no doubt similar to
those described as being found in other parts of West
Texas and New Mexico. The theory that they were

8

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

used over a long period for the purpose
of cooking the mescal plant which
contains a rather large percentage of
sugar, seems to offer the best
explanation.
To return to the cave, when we first
went to it, we were faced with the fact
that some one else had been there before
us and had dug in it, probably for the
purpose of looking for buried treasure.
There were several holes along the righthand or east wall extending towards the
rear. These holes seemed to be about
three feet deep and did not go to the
bottom of the cave by any means, but
they offered us a disappointing outlook
as we had hoped to locate a cave which
had been undisturbed. Looking at the
cave from below it gives the appearance
of having a very large high opening. This
is due to the fact that large pieces of the
roof have fallen off near the entrance and
the weathering has formed a steep talus
in front. In getting up to it you see that
there is a second overhang inside the first
formed by the weathering of the roof
having struck a somewhat harder
formation at this point. This second
overhang is about 18 or 20 feet inside
the edge of the outer overhang. The level
as we found it in the undisturbed portion
at the second overhang was only three
feet from the roof and sloped steeply so
that at the outer overhang the roof was
some twenty-five feet above. From the
inner roof to the back of the cave was a
little over thirty feet. The cave faced east
of south. The width of the cave was
about 13 or 14 feet, the walls roughly
parallel.

PLATE 1
No. 1. Burnet Cave.
No. 2. Round Mortar Holes Near Carlsbad, N. M.

I was fortunate in being able to find one of the young
men who had done the digging there before us. He
told me that when he and his brother first went there a
number of years ago, 1920 to be more exact, the cave
had a wall across the inner overhang, and another a
few feet farther in, the first one reaching to the top and

the second one to within one foot of the roof. He said
further that they had found a part of a basket lying on
the surface inside the first wall and that, at a depth of
about eighteen inches below the surface they had
uncovered three other baskets, one of which he thought
was now in the Museum at Houston. One of these he
described as a flat tray-shaped basket and one of the

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

9

others a cone-shaped carrying basket. They also found baskets, sandals, bone awls, spear foreshafts, and
pieces of netting, hide, sandals and beads. In one of fragments of coiled twine, representing a material
culture similar in many respects to the Basket-maker
the baskets were charred human bones.
of other parts of the southwest.
In view of the disturbed shape of the cave, as we
It was with high hopes therefore that we went back
found it in the summer of 1930, we decided to dig a
to
this
cave at the beginning of the past summer. The
trench along the west side which was the least
disturbed. We made this trench four or five feet wide party consisted of two of the same men who went last
and about three feet deep. From a point well in front year with me, namely, R. M. Burnet and Norman Riley,
of the inner roof we began to uncover bones of various both of Carlsbad, and without whose strong arms,
animals scattered through the fine dust and rocks which keen eyesight, and intelligent cooperation I should have
had fallen from the roof. This dust, by the way, like been lost. Nobody so far as we could see had
that found in all the dry caves of this region is so fine disturbed our cave since we had left it at the end of the
that it becomes necessary to wear a respirator of some previous summer.
sort in order to protect the lungs. Aside from the dust
Acting on the sound advice of Dr. A. V. Kidder,
the work was not unpleasant. We also found that it
that we should dig down to the hard-pan of the cave
was better for us to strip to the waist while we worked
somewhere near the front and work in on a much
in the cave since the dirt came off our bodies much
deeper face, we started our excavation this summer at
easier than it did off our shirts and did not take so
a point nearly directly under the edge of the outer
much water.
overhang, throwing the large pieces of rock and the
In addition to the bones which appeared as we dirt over the edge of the cave, after carefully examining
progressed into the cave, bits of twined-woven cord it. We found that bones of animals similar to those we
and fragments of basket and sandals showed up here were uncovering last year were showing up again,
and there. As our trench reached about two-thirds of scattered through the dirt we were taking out; but in
the way to the back of the cave we recovered two addition to this we began finding deep hearths. There
coiled baskets, one of which was placed over the other. seems little likelihood that these could have been
They were not in very good condition, but we were anything else as there were pieces of charcoal and
able to take them to the Museum for further study ashes in place and in some of the hearths burnt animal
which showed them to be similar in shape and make bones. These hearths were found at depths ranging
to Basket-maker types from other parts of the from three feet to six feet below the surface of the
Southwest. They were found at a depth of cave.
approximately eighteen inches. Nearby, at the same
As the work progressed and the face we were
level and in some cases not so deep and in others
digging reached nearly to the inner overhang, we
deeper, we found the animal bones already mentioned.
encountered on the east side and at a depth of
Upon further study on the part of Dr. Malcolm R.
approximately one foot and a half, a piece of hide on
Thorpe of the Peabody Museum at Yale University
which was resting, what turned out to be, a very fine
these bones were identified as being those of an extinct
twined-woven bag. The skin was that of an antelope
bison, two extinct horses, and a rather rare extinct
doubled over and with the hair turned in. On top of it
antelope, Tetrameryx shuleri, the horn-core and part
and between it and the bag was a small piece of hide,
of the lower jaw representing the latter. There were
with the hair still on, of a young buffalo. The bag
also a number of large bird bones uncovered, and these
contained small pieces of charred human bones. There
were identified by Dr. Wetmore of the Smithsonian
was also what appears to have been a feather headInstitution as those of the California condor and wild
dress the cords of which were made out of the same
turkey. With this evidence we ceased our work there
material as the bag, the feathers were identified by Dr.
for the season, being unable to draw any conclusions
Wetmore as golden eagle. The bag itself is typical of
as to the association, in the same cave and at similar
Basket-maker bags from other parts of the southwest,
depths, of an extinct fauna with material such as coiled
particularly those from the Grand Gulch region of

10

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

southeastern Utah. It had been split down one side.
The material is of some form of the yucca, made into
two-strand cord, alternating red and white. It is
decorated with several bands of black and yellowish
lines. (See No. 3, Plate 2). The depth at which this
bag was found is approximately the same as that of
the baskets found by us the year before further back
in the cave, and also those baskets which had been
found some years previously by the two brothers who
went to the cave before it had been disturbed, namely
about a foot and a half.
Slightly west of this cremated burial and about 18
inches farther under the surface was found a large
hearth containing animal bones. Other hearths
appeared as we progressed along both walls of the
cave, bones of horse, bison and bird being probably
the most frequently encountered. Of the horse bones,

in addition to teeth, jawbones and leg bones we found
a number of cores of the hoofs, one of which was so
small that it undoubtedly was that of an unborn horse.
There were also a number of the large bird leg-bones
similar to the ones identified for us last year by Dr.
Wetmore of the Smithsonian Institute as those of the
California condor and the turkey. This year we
recovered the beak of some large bird, no doubt that
of the condor. Dr. Wetmore has identified all of the
bird bones found this year and the list includes the
following: Lesser Prairie Chicken, Turkey, California
Condor (these two already mentioned), Turkey
Vulture, Cooper’s Hawk, Swainson’s Hawk, Prairie
Falcon, Great Horned Owl, Shorteared Owl, Flicker,
Yellow-headed Blackbird, Mountain Quail, and Black
Vulture (these last two being new to that locality, and
not found there today).

PLATE 2
No. 3. Basket Maker Twined Woven Bag Found in Cave.

The most interesting hearth we came
across in our work was one along the
west wall. After a hard but rather fruitless
day of work, when we were just about
to stop, Bill Burnett’s eye focussed on a
large rock which we had not yet removed
from the cave, and he said that he had a
“hunch” that we would find something
interesting under it. More or less to
humor him we lifted it up and he began
to feel around carefully in the dirt with
his hands, taking out some bison bones.
In a few minutes, however, his hand
struck a stone object, which, when I
examined it in the light, gave me quite a
thrill, because it was different from
anything we had found. It was a spearpoint and had a groove along the face
from the base similar to the points found
at Folsom, N. M., and now generally
known as Folsom points. (See No. 4,
Plate 3). It was not as beautifully made
as the Folsom points I had seen, but it
was made the same way and the material
from which it was made differed from that
of the points we had found nearer the
surface. It might be called a generalized
type of Folsom point, as it does not show
the remarkable control in chipping shown

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

11

dug to a depth of eight feet six inches, which was about
as deep as we went. At seven feet below the surface
we found bird bones.

Plate 3
No. 4. Generalized Folsom Type Spear Point.
in the points recovered from Folsom. There have been
a number of others found in west Texas and other
places in the southwest like the one I am trying to
describe here, the most noticeable feature of which is
the groove along each face. The depth at which our
spear-point was found was five feet seven inches below
the surface and about four feet below the level of the
Basket-maker burial. As I mentioned we had to move
a large rock which was directly over the hearth. The
rock had evidently fallen from the roof of the cave,
and the underneath side was covered with charcoal.
At this point in our work we were running very low
on supplies of food and water. This last was always a
serious matter with us, since we had to carry along
with us all our water for drinking, cooking and washing.
For this purpose we had a tank constructed in the car,
with a spigot on the outside, and this tank held close
to forty gallons. We, therefore, covered up the place
in the cave where we had been excavating the hearth,
packed up our equipment and went back to Carlsbad
to replenish our supplies.
When we returned a few days later Mr. W. B. Lang
of the U. S. Geologic Survey very kindly went with us
to help us check some of our calculations. He spent
the day with us and returned that evening. While he
was there we took up our digging where we had left
off at the edge of the hearth in which we had found the
bison bones and the spear-point. A few inches away
from where we had found these and at approximately
the same level we uncovered a horn which we
recognized could not be bison as it had a peculiar twist
to it. This turned out later to be the horn of a musk-ox.
On the east side of the cave we found a horn of a
bison, teeth of bison and horse and other bones
associated with charcoal and ashes. At this time we

It seemed wise, after a few more days, to
discontinue our work in order to have some more
competent judge than myself pass on the importance
of these finds. A conference of those engaged in studies
and field work in the southwest was scheduled to be
held in Santa Fe within a few days, so I decided to
embrace this opportunity to seek some information
relative to our finds. I attended the conference and
was much pleased to have everyone who saw the
spear-point pronounce it as similar to the Folsom type.
I had arranged earlier in the season to meet Mr. Barnum
Brown of the American Museum of Natural History
of New York at Folsom, and this turned out to be a
fortunate circumstance for me, as I knew that he would
be interested in the finds we had made. After a few
days spent at the site where he had found the original
Folsom points, Mr. Brown agreed to go back to the
cave at Three Forks with me. In the meantime I had
shown him some of the bones we had brought in from
the cave, and he identified many of them, being
particularly interested in the horn with the peculiar shape
and which he identified as that of an extinct musk-ox.
Four of us went out to the cave, and choosing a
camping-site a short distance away from our old site,
in order to try to fool the gnats which had been a great
annoyance to us before, we took up some further
digging in the cave. It was very gratifying to me to
have Mr. Brown begin almost at once to take out
various animal bones, most of which he was able to
identify on the spot. It was also a rare opportunity for
me to see with what care he removed bones which
were in very fragile condition. In this way Mr. Brown
took out several jaw bones with the lower teeth in
place; these turned out later to belong to the musk-ox.
At a depth of six feet eight inches below the surface of
the cave he took out a vertebra of a large camel. A
number of small animal bones and bird bones came
out at depths below this, almost all the way to the
original floor of the cave.
As we worked down the face of our excavation
we came across another burial. It was in rather a
disintegrated state, but with the patience and care which

12

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

comes from a long experience in such matters, Mr.
Brown removed a considerable quantity of human
bones, among which were some skull bones. It was
evidently a cremated burial like the one we had
uncovered nearer the front of the cave, and although
not very much remained, there was sufficient to show
that there had been a twined-woven bag with it, and
also some sort of grass basket. This burial was some
three feet below the surface, and near the edge of one
of the holes dug by the two young cowpunchers some
years before. There was in the burial a large Unio shell,
made into an ornament of some sort, and a smaller
one for the same purpose. Mr. Brown identified a part
of a very small skull, which from the size could have
been only that of a human embryo. The larger skull is
in process of being put together at the American
Museum in New York, and enough of the work has
been done to show that it is of a long-headed type.
Taking into consideration the evidence of this burial
and of the other objects found in the same cave, it
would seem to be a safe conclusion that they represent
what is now known as a Basket-maker culture, though
there is nothing to prove that it is of the same age as
the culture of the San Juan area of northeastern Arizona
and southeastern Utah.

shown that the so-called Folsom point was in
association with some of them, and therefore, of a
contemporaneous period? It seems unwise to attempt
to offer definite proof that these bones have been in
the cave for years, measured by the thousands rather
than the hundreds; in other words, that they represent
Pleistocene animals. It is perfectly possible that these
animals continued to live in that region, due to local
conditions, long after the recession of the great ice
sheet of the last glaciation. All that can be done is to
present the facts as found, in the hope that they will
eventually aid in proving the existence of man in this
country at a period much earlier than the Basketmaker.

It can be readily seen, from an examination of the
cave, that the rocks found there were dislodged from
the roof; the material is the same and the shapes of the
larger blocks are similar to those which can be removed
from the walls today. There are pieces which are
blackened by smoke and other blocks with a coating
of charcoal and ashes adhering to one face—usually
the under side. This would seem to indicate that parts
of the roof-rock had fallen on to hearths below, as the
appearance of smoke-blackened roof-rock is quite
different. In this connection it might be mentioned, in
To return, now, to a further examination of the animal passing, that the excreta of the daddy-long-legs found
bones, the identifications made by Dr. Thorpe of Yale in the darker parts of these caves give a very similar
University and recently by Mr. Barnum Brown of the appearance to a smoke-blackened roof, till examined
American Museum of Natural History of New York, carefully through a hand lens.
make it appear evident that the fauna of this cave is
Between the rocks thus fallen from the roof there
largely an extinct one. A list of the forms found is made
is a very fine dust, mixed in places with debris and
up of an extinct four-horned antelope (Tetrameryx),
pack-rat dung. The dust, under the microscope, shows
two extinct horses (Equus fraternus and E.
it to be mostly the disintegrated rock particles of cave
complicatus), extinct bison (Bison alleni), extinct muskwalls and roof. It is very fine and goes through a 200ox (Bootherium sp), a large extinct camel, extinct
mesh sieve readily. In spite of this fineness we were
California condor, and a number of other bird bones,
able, on account of the rocks and fibrous debris, to
including those of the wild turkey. There is also the red
cut down the face of our excavation so that it was
fox, ring-tailed cat, prairie dog, pack rat, kangaroo
nearly vertical, showing that the undisturbed dirt and
rat, field mouse, white-footed mouse, pocket mouse,
rock was packed down sufficiently to prevent the
true squirrel, pocket gopher, jack rabbit, cotton-tail
working down of objects to lower levels. However,
rabbit, and turtle. A few invertebrate fossils were found
the cave had been used by pack-rats for a long time,
in the rocks in the cave, a spirifer and a productus
and where they have burrowed down along the walls,
among others.
objects could undoubtedly work down to lower levels,
The first question that presents itself is: when did and bones, showing tooth marks of rodents could be
these animals become extinct; is there any way to carried upwards.
establish the age of these bones? If so can it be definitely

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Could the spear-point, therefore have worked its
way down from a higher level than that at which it was
found? It would be hard to prove definitely that it had
not; but the facts are that it was found directly under
the flat side of a rock, in size about two feet long by
one and a half wide by ten inches thick, under which
was a hearth composed of charcoal and ashes which
extended beyond the edges of the rock, and some of
the charcoal was adhering to the under side when two
of us lifted it up. It looked as though the rock had
fallen directly from the roof upon the hearth in which
the spear-point and the bones were found.

13

and climate in this country is extensive and we shall
refer to only two or three authorities. Good
bibliographies can be found in “The Evolution of
Climate” and “Climate Through the Ages,” by C. E. P.
Brooks; and in “The Last Glaciation,” by Ernst Antevs.
In these publications reference is made to the region
we have been discussing. We may note that the last or
Wisconsin glacier extended across two-thirds of the
Continent from Nantucket and Cape Cod through
Long Island, northern New Jersey, southern New
York, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin,
Minnesota, Iowa, the Dakotas, Manitoba,
Saskatchewan, and Alberta. At the same time the
Granted that the facts tend to show the spear-point
Cordilleran centre probably bore valley glaciers.
and the bones in this hearth were at an undisturbed
level of the cave, how can we date the spear-point by
The cave we have been discussing is at an
the age of the bones? To put it another way can we approximate elevation of 4,600 feet, the highest peaks
date the bones in a satisfactory way, and thus arrive at of the Guadalupes beyond rising to over double this
an approximate date for the spear-point, found in close height. During the period when the snowfall became
association? The bones were not mineralized, but they greater on the mountains, during the last glaciation,
were decalcified, and many of them broken, mountain glaciers must have formed in the Guadalupes.
particularly the leg bones. They may have been broken Brooki says that further south, out of reach of the main
by man for the marrow, although many were, no doubt, ice-sheets, there are traces of two and in places three
broken by the rocks which fell from the roof. The bones separate developments of valley glaciers resembling
of the musk-ox probably offer the best evidence in those of the Alps. There is, therefore, the possibility
helping to arrive at a time factor in regard to this cave, that even after the last glacier began to recede, a very
since climatic conditions must have been very different much colder climate existed, at the altitude of the cave,
at the time he lived in that region from what they have for a long period; but how long this lasted would be
been for a long period since. Today the musk-ox lives hard to say. Ellsworth Huntington in Carnegie
in Arctic North America—Alaska and Greenland. Institution Publication No. 192, says that the alluvial
Remains of this animal have been found in a number of terraces of both Asia and America are evidently due
places which are very distant from his present habitat. to a series of changes of decreasing intensity, which
According to Hay these fossil remains have been found makes it seem probable that the oldest terrace may
outside the outermost moraines in Illinois, Indiana, West represent the last glacial epoch, and that the others
Virginia, Missouri, and Iowa; and within the glaciated represent the post-glacial stages or minor epochs of
area of Ohio and Indiana. So far as we have been glacial retreat. He adds, that if the oldest terrace dates
able to ascertain the finding of the musk-ox in back no more than 30,000 years, more or less, the
southeastern New Mexico marks the farthest point youngest cannot be more than 2000 or 3000 years
south that the bones of this animal have been found. old at the most, and maybe much less. Antevs has
done very extensive work on clay varves, or annual
It seems reasonable to suppose, therefore, that the
clay layers formed during ice retreat. Based on these
musk-ox moved south with the oncoming of the last
studies, together with other lines of research upon the
ice sheet, and that he moved northward as the icesubject, it would seem to be safe to assume a date of
sheet retreated. There is considerable evidence that
say 20,000 to 25,000 years ago for the beginning of
the desert belts of Arizona and New Mexico
the last glacial retreat. It would also seem to be safe to
underwent distinct climatic changes in post-glacial
assume that the musk-ox lived in the region of the
times, and it might be well to refer briefly to some of
Guadalupe Mountains for a considerable period after
the references on the subject. The literature on glaciers
the ice began to retreat farther to the north and that

14

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

mountain glaciers were left in the higher parts of
these mountains where such animals may have re
treated until such time as the gradually changing
climate caused their extinction.
We have no space for any further discussion of
these questions but we should like to call attention to
the fact that the bones of the extinct horses found in
this cave bring up some interesting queries.
These things open up many interesting lines of
thought, but we must curb our flights of fancy, and
observe the facts. Summed up we may restate these:
extinct animal bones have been found in a cave in
southeastern New Mexico. Some of these have been
found in hearths, some of them actually burned, and in
the case of certain bison and musk-ox bones found in
actual association with a spearpoint resembling the
Folsom type. This particular hearth was four feet below
a cremated Basket-Maker burial, the bones of which
were placed in a very finely made twined-woven
bag, wrapped about with antelope skin. We present
these facts not with the purpose of proving anything,

but with the idea that it will add to the evidence
which seems to be accumulating and pointing to an
occupation of certain parts of this country by people
who antedated the Basket-Makers. To mention only
two examples, of several which have been reported,
as evidence of this kind, first the well-known
discoveries at Folsom, New Mexico, of a large
number of extinct bison bones found in association
with spear points, which have given the name to
the specialized type of points mentioned, secondly,
the discovery, last summer, at Angus, Nebraska, by
a party under the direction of J. D. Figgins, of the
Colorado Museum of Natural History, of a spear
point of the general Folsom type found under the
shoulder blade of a large elephant.
The continuation of work of this kind, it is to be
hoped will eventually produce sufficient evidence
to enable something definite to be offered which
will convince the most skeptical that man has
existed longer in this country than we are willing
to admit at this time.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

15

PAINTED PEBBLES OF THE TEXAS BIG BEND
BY GEORGE CASTOR MARTIN AND SAMUEL WOOLFORD
Two hundred feet above the water in the high and
abrupt cliff forming the north bank of the Rio Grande
at Shumla, Texas, is a large cave shelter capable of
housing a fairly numerous family. It has been long
occupied in the past, its flooring is deeply covered
with wood ashes and the usual debris always found in
cave dwellings. The artifacts are of the typical “Big
Bend” type of Basket-Maker remains, basketry,
cordage, sandals, nets, pouches of skin, bone and
stone implements, but, added to these were “painted
pebbles” of a type hitherto undescribed as having been
previously found in other typical Basket-maker
habitations. When the Woolford-Martin-Witte
Museum Expedition reached this cave in September,
1931, it had already been entered by several local
investigators and the surface had been badly dug over
in a hap-hazard manner, however, some spots were
untouched and we were able to determine that the
same types of remains permeated the ashes from the
surface to the hardpan. Several skeletons had been
removed and the bones scattered around the surface.
The foot of one adult was mummified. Burials were in
the ashes forming the flooring, the bodies were laid in
grass-hay and the same material was spread over
them before they were covered. This method of burial
differs from that found in caves in the vicinity of
Boquillas where the same types of artifacts were found
in connection with burial in basketry and nets. One
pelvis still in place showed that that portion of the
body had lain on its back, while two leg bones still
articulated denoted flexed burial. The Expedition found
no complete burials in place in the Shumla cave. This
article, however, is intended to treat only of the
“painted pebbles,” the data on this cave and the other
cave dwellings visited by the Expedition, will be
published later by the Witte Memorial Museum in San
Antonio.
A Hingston Quiggin, M. A., in his “Primeval Man,”
London, 1912, mentions colored pebbles as having
been found at Mas d’Azil, Department of Ariege, in
France, in shelters occupied at various epochs from

Paleolithic to Modern times, but does not state in which
period the pebbles have been classified. He writes:
“But the greatest interest centers around the famous
colored pebbles (see Nos. 7 and 8, Plate 4). Some
take these to represent the beginnings of a prehistoric
alphabet; others regard them as magical signs; others
again, think they belong to a game.”
M. C. Burkitt, in his “Prehistory,” Cambridge
University Press, 1925, enters into more detail and
places the painted pebbles at the end of Magdalenian
times—”the latter being pebbles from the river Arise
near by, which have been covered with red lines,
smears, and patterns. These painted pebbles have been
classified into various types according to whether there
were one, two, or more dots or bars on their surface.
In some cases the edge of the stone is indicated by a
red circle, and the vertical bars are crossed by horizontal
ones, etc. * * * * * Dr. Obermaier in his book, ‘El
Hombre Fosil’, has compared these painted pebbles
with certain ‘idol’ signs from the third Spanish group
and has thus suggested that some of the signs on the
painted pebbles represented conventionalized human
forms. Again they have been compared with the
Australian ‘churinga’.” M. Piette suggested that they
represented numerical signs, and they have been
thought of as forming a sort of currency. The red paint
on them is ochre mixed with fat, and several palettes
(made of pecten shell) have been found in the cave. At
the grotto of Birseck, seven kilometers south of Bael,
in the rock on which the castle of Birseck is built, an
Azilian deposit was found containing painted pebbles,
all of which had been broken intentionally. Was this
done by some enemy, or had it some sinister meaning?
At La Tourasse there are painted pebbles on which
are incrustations of stalagmite, a proof of their
authenticity and contemporaneity with the deposits.
Painted pebbles do very rarely occur in the deposits
of Upper Magdalenian age, as has been shown by the
diggings of Dr. Obermaier a few years ago in Bavaria
and Cantabria. Painted pebbles occur in North
Scotland in association with the keiss brochs. Examples

16

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

of these which the writer has seen do
not seem to bear any relationship to the
painted pebbles of the Mas d’Azil, etc.
* * * * * Their association with brochs
denotes that they must be of late Celtic
age. There is a chance, however, that
they may be older, and that the brochs
may have been built on the sites of the
older civilization. With the pebbles were
found chipped stone tools, tines of stags,
bones of penguin, elk, and a few
reindeer.”
The painted pebbles from the Shumla
cave-shelter are, with one exception,
pebbles from the Rio Grande, the
exception a scale from the roof of the
shelter which, when found, was much
more complete than pictured, but which
was broken by a Mexican workman after
it had been placed in the collection at
the cave. Two of the painted pebbles,
the most interesting of those found, were
missing when the collection finally arrived
at the Museum. One of these was a
perfect heraldic design which would have
been technically described as “quarterly,
gules and argent,” a vertical line crossed
by one running horizontally, the first and
fourth quarters shaded vertically. The
other missing pebble bore a very clear
and distinct track of a hoofed animal
crossing it diagonally. It was of unusual
Plate 4
interest as the tracks were apparently
those of a horse. This stone may yet turn
Nos. 5-6. Shumla Cave Painted Pebbles.
up again, misplaced in the Museum. Of
Nos. 7-8. European Paleolithic Painted Pebbles.
the pebbles illustrated herewith, those in
No. 5 were found by the WoolfordMartin Expedition and Miss Emma Gutzeit. All are animal fat or oil. From this paint all animal matter has
from the one cave at Shumla. The designs are now totally vanished and the black, itself, is faded and
indescribable, they are not mere scratchings and toned down by age and wood ashes from the cave
certainly were executed with reason and for a purpose flooring. All traces of paint can be wiped off with a
difficult to guess. There is a possibility that they were dampened cloth.
tallies or record stones, while one could have been a
The accompanying drawings were made by Mr.
rough map or chart.
Ben C. Mead, official artist for the Witte Museum.
The decorative features, the markings, are all done
in black, evidently soot from the cave roof mixed with

His opinion on the painting of the pebbles is of interest.
“The pebbles were painted with a brush, with a liquid

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
or semi-liquid pigment. I have worked a good deal
with charcoal and when it is applied direct from the
stick it will wipe off as clean as though it had never
been applied. It takes some kind of binding vehicle to
make it stick as well as it has on these stones. Also,
the manner in which some of the marks taper out to a
sharp point on the ends indicates the use of a fairly
well made brush—perhaps the fibers from the end of
a small piece of vegetation, or it may have been fur or
hair.”

17

that has an indefinite pattern such as one of these stones.
The designs simply fade out while you look directly at
them, and are so intermingled with the dust and water
stains and shading caused by the texture of the stone
itself that it is simply impossible to look at the marking,
put down a pen and ink stroke, and then say that you
have made just what is there on the stone. In making
these drawings I have tried to imitate the effect of what
I see as nearly as possible, without putting down what
I think may have been there at one time. Therefore I
Mr. Mead continues: “It is extremely difficult to resorted to the use of some stippling to indicate the
make a rendering in strong black and white of an object roundness of the stones.”

18

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

EXCAVATIONS AT TECOLOTE DURING SUMMER OF 1931
BY W. C. HOLDEN
The 1931 archeological field class of Texas
Technological College spent five days excavating at
the Tecolote pre-pueblo site during June and July.
The report on the work of the previous summer was
published in Vol. III of The Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Bulletin. Most of the excavation in
the summer of 1930 was done in Mound A. (See
map, page 45, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Bulletin, Vol. lll). This last summer
(1931) a new policy was adopted. In view
of the fact that the river is cutting back under
Mound A on the north side and as there is a
considerable extent of good “pay dirt” east
of Mound A, it was decided to excavate at
several promising points along the river bank.
So far as material and a study of stratification
is concerned, the plan turned out to be more
profitable than the one of the year before.

Two feet farther down and slightly to the east of
the first burial was another, a child of perhaps six years.
This skeleton was in bad condition. The skull was rather
long and apparently not flattened. Just above the
skeleton was an inch and a half layer of ash-colored
clay. A few shards of pottery made of the same material
were found in the vicinity. The shards have a red slip
and are easily broken. Two mortuary objects were

One point of interest was room d. (See
map, page 46, Volume III, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological
Bulletin). This room had been excavated to
the first floor level during the previous
summer. Something inspired W. D.
McWilliams to dig a trial trench below the
first floor level, and the deeper he went the
more fruitful the digging became. The soil
was loose and greasy and contained
numerous shards, broken bones, charcoal
and ashes. Some three feet below the present
surface, and one foot below the first floor
level, he found a much-used stone fist
hammer.
Six feet below the surface he came upon
a well preserved burial. It was that of an old
man, above medium size, with bad teeth (he
had evidently had pyorrhea in a severe form),
and a posteriorly flattened skull. No artifacts
or mortuary objects of any kind were near
the skeleton.

PLATE 5
No. 9. Potsherds From Tecolote Ruin.
No. 10.Artifacts From Tecolote Ruin.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

19

found at the child’s head, a white quartz spear point awl three inches long, a small twisting arrowpoint of
and a potshard with a hole in one end and its edges obsidian-like flint; and a small scraper of milky quartz
fashioned with exquisite care. Room d was not
ground smooth.
completely excavated to the eight foot level. Farther
The best “pay dirt” in room d is eight feet below
digging will probably yield additional material of
the present level, or six feet below the most recent
interest.
floor level. At one place at that depth McWilliams found
twenty or thirty charred corn cobs. The cobs averaged
A second point of interest was discovered by
from three to four inches long. In another place he Herbert West on the river bank eighty-five feet east of
found a stag-horn pressure flaker. Nearby was a round Mound A and one hundred and thirty-three feet east
object made from a potshard, about the size of a dollar of trench x, y in Mound A. After two days of puzzled
with the edges rounded and with a design of black on digging, the place turned out to be an underground
white on one side. Among other artifacts were a bone kiva. It was discovered quite by accident. West was
passing along the bottom of the
river bank (which is practically
vertical and some fifteen feet high
at the place) and saw an unusually
large potshard extending from the
bank. He procured the shard and
began digging into the bank hoping
to find other shards from the same
spot. At a depth of eight inches he
came to something made of red
clay and exceedingly hard.
Following it out, the object proved
to be a hearth. It was almost round,
thirty inches in diameter and twelve
inches deep. The sides were ten
inches thick, made of red clay
hardened by fire and plastered with
a grayish, cement-like clay. At the
bottom of the south wall of the
hearth was a hole, or vent, six
inches in diameter. Embedded in the
east wall was a large, flat rock
standing on edge. The hearth was
filled to a depth of eight inches with
ashes.

PLATE 6
No. 11. Bone Artifacts From Tecolote Ruin.
No. 12. Flint Artifacts From Tecolote Ruin.

The construction of the hearth
was so different from the type
usually found in kivas that we were
at a loss for a time as to what to
make of it. Meanwhile, the students
referred to it as the “bath tub.”
Finding the ground level around the
outside of the base of the hearth
hard and level, we began to follow

20

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

it out. Eventually someone discovered what was once
a wall of the kiva. It was traced out and found to be
practically round. Originally the kiva had been
excavated and the earthen sides of the room plastered
with a substance having the appearance of gypsum
mixed with ashes. Three different coats of plaster were
applied. The walls slanted outward slightly from the
bottom upward. The floor of the room is six feet below
the present level. The plaster on the walls reaches three
and a half feet above the present level. As to the
construction above that level we have not been able
to ascertain as yet. Two feet east (slightly southeast)
of the hearth were three large flat stones standing in
line on edge, forming a fire screen customarily found
in kivas. The river has already carried away over onethird of the room on the north side.
Two burials were encountered within the kiva. One
was eight feet west of the hearth and two feet above
the floor, or four feet below the present surface. The
burial was that of a middle-age man. The skull was
flattened in the typical fashion. The teeth were worn
down considerably, but were in good condition. About
half of the rest of the bones were missing. No hand or
foot bones were found. The second burial within the
kiva was three feet west of the first and eighteen inches
above it, or two and a half inches below the surface.
The condition of this skeleton was too bad for it to be
removed. On and slightly above the kiva floor were
found thirteen bone awls and needles, all in good
condition; seven small arrow-points, one of obsidian;
two small, finely shaped scrapers; three flint artifacts
of doubtful classification; an arrow shaft polisher; a
stone hammer; a bone digging tool; and several pieces
of muscovite with a peculiar type of hole punched
through each piece.

A burial of a woman was found near the river bank
thirty six feet west of the kiva and five feet below the
surface. The skeleton was that of a woman of medium
size and past middle age. It was in good condition
with the exception of the skull which was considerably
crushed. Thirty feet west of this burial was another
near the river bank and eighteen inches below the
surface. It was that of a child about twelve years old
and was in bad condition. No mortuary objects were
found in either of these burials.
In addition to the skeletons and artifacts mentioned
above about a bushel of potshards were taken from
the various excavations. The shards have been assorted
and classified by students in the archeological
workshop, and several pots have been restored from
the assortment. There is a possibility of getting several
more.
No attempt will be made to generalize or form
conclusions in regard to findings of the Tecolote
excavations, but a prediction may be in order. A number
of corroborating evidences seem to indicate a very
definite relationship between the pre-pueblo Tecolote
culture and that of the Panhandle along the Canadian
River. But we must do more work, both at Tecolote
and on the Canadian before we are ready to venture
so definite an assertion.
In June, 1932, Mr. E. J. Lowery conducted further
excavations at the A-C (Antelope Creek) ruin
northeast of Amarillo. Mr. Lowry is not yet ready to
make a full report on his season’s work, but a study of
the accompanying pictures will indicate a similarity
between the artifacts found by Mr. Lowery and those
we excavated at the pre-Pueblo ruin at Tecolote.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

21

ARTIFACTS OF THE RIO GRANDE DELTA REGION
BY A. E. ANDERSON
On the Texas side of the river the delta of the
Sea and fresh water shell artifacts are typical of
Rio Grande covers a triangular area with its apex the delta camp sites. Apparently only one culture
at a point on the river seventy-five miles inland complex existed within the Rio Grande delta. Within
and its base lies along the coast between the mouth this area the types of artifacts listed below occur.
of the Arroyo Colorado and the Rio
Grande.
In its western area occur gravel
hills, and along the coast the soil is
composed of sands and silted clays.
The delta terrain is crossed by
alluvial ridges following the course
of old overflow channels of the
river. There also are small fresh
water lakes and areas of nearly flat
land.
In former times much of this area
was covered with natural prairie
grasses. At the present time due to
pasturing with cattle, much of the
uncultivated area is now covered
with dense growth of thorny plants
of a type found in the semi-arid
regions.
In recent years much of the land
has been devoted to citrus and other
crops and the incidental cultivation
has hastened erosive forces.
Evidences of former human
occupation are found inland during
the digging of canals, drainage
ditches, etc., bordering the old
overflow channels of the river and
in the land surrounding the small
fresh water lakes.
The area where archeological
material is most often found lies in
the coastal prairie belt on clay hills
within a few miles of the sea shore.
Since 1908 a large collection has
been assembled from the delta area.

Plate 7
Nos. 13-14-15. Shell Beads, Tinklers, Pendants, Tubes,
and Other Shell Artifacts.

22

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Worked Stone

Conch Shell Artifacts

Flint projectile points, knives, scrapers, drills,
hammerstones, chipped nodules, pitted stones,
pumice stone pipe, rubbing stones, sand stone
abrading, rubbing stones, fire marked beach stones
or shales, and pieces of rubbed coral are found.

Artifacts made from sea shells, mostly conch, are
as follows: Hand axes, scrapers, tinklers, beads, disks,
sockets, plugs for drills, hook shaped objects, points,
pendants, gorgets, specialized tools, (gouges), gaming
disks, band ornaments.

Pottery Types

Fresh Water Shells

The following pottery types are found:

Artifacts made from fresh water shells are as follows:
Incised and plain gorgets and occasional beads and
Grey colored, thin, decorated with asphalt lines
hook shaped objects.
and coated with asphalt internally.
Buff colored, thin, not decorated, blackened by
fire.

Shell Beads and Points

Brick red colored, purplish cast inside, 3-8 inch
Various marine shells perforated for stringing by
thick.
drilling, notching, rubbing and breaking but otherwise
unworked are found. Chipped projectile points of
Light, greenish grey colored, wash, blackened
conch shell, similar in form to the triangular points of
outside, brown inside. 5-16 inch thick.
flint occur but are quite rare.
Heavy, buff to brown colored, no fire marks.
Other Materials
Pipes and disks.
Green bottle glass projectile points similar to those
of flint, are found but are scarce. Points of banded
Paint Materials
obsidian of greenish color are found but are rare. These
Small pieces of soft material showing use
points are similar in form to those made of flint.
(suggestive of hematic that has been scraped from the
natural stone, and compacted) are found.
Bone Artifacts
Bone awls, incised tubes, ornaments (pin like),
flakers, notched pieces of bone ornaments
resembling gorgets; perforated teeth; and tubular
beads are found.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

23

THE AZTEC INFLUENCE ON THE PRIMITIVE
CULTURE OF THE SOUTHWEST
BY COLONEL M. L. CRIMMINS
There are two ways to reconstruct the story of the
primitive people of the Southwest. One, by chronology,
and the stratigraphic system of studying the different
layers of earth in their home sites and the other way is
to try to bring the dead to life and clothe with living
flesh, their dry bones. The first gives us a record
“whence they came and why,” and the latter gives us
the reason “why they go and where.”
As the Roman influence on the primitive life and
culture of Europe, can be traced by the spread of the
Latin language from Italy to France, Spain, and
Portugal, so the Aztec influence on the primitive life of
the Southwest, can be studied by tracing the wide
geographical distribution of the Uto-Aztecan language.
The different tribes of that ancient Shoshonian stock
represent a very wide range of culture, although nearly
all dwelt in arid or semiarid regions. Concentration of
the food supply with the subsequent concentration of
population, is the source of greatest cultural
development.
A study of the diagram of “American Chronology”
of Herbert Spinden shows that the most probable
ancestors of our American Indians were of Asiatic
origin. Dr. Arls Hrdlicka wrote of the “Remains in
Eastern Asia of the Race that Peopled America,”
as follows: “The writer feels justified in advancing the
opinion, that there exists today, over large parts of
Eastern Siberia and in Mongolia, Tibet, and other
regions in that part of the world, numerous remains,
which now form constituent parts of more modern
tribes or nations, of a more ancient population (related
in origin perhaps with the latest paleolithic European)
who are physically identical with, and in all probability,
gave rise to the American Indian.”
It is believed that the primary invasion from Asia
via Alaska, was between 15,000 and 10,000 years
before Christ. They were a people of upper Paleolithic
culture, who made chipped stone artifacts or lower
Neolithic who started to polish stone, but they were
without agriculture, pottery, or the knowledge of loom

weaving. Contemporaneous existence of man,
mammoth, and saber-toothed tiger was proven in the
Dordogne region in Southwestern France by the
pictographs painted in caves representing these
animals, and a similar contemporaneous existence of
man, cave bear, American camel, American horse and
ground sloth, has been recently proved by finding their
remains in juxtaposition in the Conkling Cave, thirty
miles north of El Paso.
The great linguistic group that spread over our arid
and semiarid southwest, were the Shoshonian. We find
evidences of their Uto-Aztec language among the Utes
as far north as Montana and Idaho, among the Paiutes
of Southern California on the southwest and among
the Comanche of Texas on the east, among the Hopi
of Arizona in the south center and among the Pimas
and Papages in Southern Arizona and in dialects of
Northwestern Mexico.
There was a concentration of population and culture
near sources of permanent water, as in central New
Mexico along the Rio Grande and its tributaries and in
the San Juan region where the corners of New Mexico,
Arizona, Colorado, and Utah meet. This concentration
was caused by a cultivated food. It required less labor
to cultivate food, than it did to hunt and kill it.
Consequently, there was a certain amount of leisure,
and as the cultivation increased, leisure increased in
proportion. This was due to a heavy-seeded grass
introduced from the highlands of Mexico, called
Teocentli, which was the ancestor of our corn. With it
came the art of the Archaic Horizon and clay female
fetishes, a pottery prayer for fertility and a sedentary
life appeared. The crops had to be watched to keep
animals from destroying them, cultivated to make them
grow, and stored to save the harvest from wild animals.
The people who did this, have been called the BasketMakers. They built storage cists probably over four
thousand years ago, in the San Juan region, and as
their culture progressed, these storage cists, were
transformed into single room pit-houses, in small
groups, later on into the stone houses of the Cliff

24

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Dwellers and finally into the terraced
rooms of the Pueblos. While the
simple arts of stone-chipping,
basketry, and fire-making, were
probably brought over from Asia, by
the ancestors of our Indians, it is
believed that pottery making,
weaving, and agriculture were not
practiced until long after the arrival
of the first Americans. No cultivated
plant of the Old World, seems to
have been brought over to the New
World, by these first Americans, and
there is a broad barrier between the
old and the new world, that does not
show any evidence of agriculture,
ever having been practiced there.
What rice was to Asia, corn was
to America, and so it was that
Teocentli started culture and
sedentary habits, and soon other
foods such as beans and squash were
grown and with leisure came
invention. The wanderlust that drove
the first Americans onward,
PLATE 8
probably caused the younger and
No. 16. Map of the Peregrinations of the Aztec Tribe in Mexico.
more active to push on south. Those
in the San Juan region soon struck
the Gila River and spread east and west, and those in had been found in the Casas Grande area, Casas
Central New Mexico descended the “Rio Del Norte.” Grande pottery has not been found in the Mimbres
A unique and high state of culture was reached near area, which further shows that the Aztec tradition, that
the headwaters of the Mimbres, near what is now Silver their ancestors came from the north, was probably
City, New Mexico. It was here that the highest form correct. One hundred miles east of the Mimbres we
of Ceramic art was reached in America, according to do find a contact. At Three Rivers, New Mexico, one
our late lamented, Dr. J. Walter Fewkes. Some of their hundred miles north of El Paso, were found thirty-five
effigy jars and designs, are similar to those of the Casas petroglyphs which I copied and Dr. Fewkes said they
Grandes, and others were like those found along the were similar in design to those of the Mimbres, and at
Gila.
the Dona Anna Target Range, thirty miles north of El
Paso, we found the typical Chihuahua copper trade
The most important motivating effect on migration
bells, long associated with the Casas Grande culture.
was water, and constant water was found along the
Again, thirty miles east of El Paso, we find Aztec
tributaries of four stream in the Southwest, the Gila,
pictographs showing the scroll word or tongue, the
the Rio Grande, the Little Colorado, and the San Juan.
sign of speech, emerging from the mouth, both in profile
The relation of the Mimbro-Aztec to the Aztec of and in front view; the black painted figures of the Aztec
Atzlan or Casas Grandes, Chichuahua is shown by priests with a red god-band across the mouth, and the
Dr. A. V. Kidder, who includes them in the pueblo goggle-shaped eyes and some with crowns on their
culture area. Fewkes writes that while Mimbres pottery heads.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
All the branches of the Shoshonian stock, the
ancestors of the Aztecs, the Paiutes, Utes, Comanche,
Hopi, Papagoe, and Pimas kept records of current
events by painting pictographs or pecking petroglyphs.
Many of these signs were Totemic signatures, so ably
demonstrated by Dr. Fewkes in his list of four hundred,
and are what we will call crests or “brands.” Others
were probably maps with trails leading to the most
important thing in arid country—water. Some were
records of unusual events, like the spear penetrating
the mountain sheep from below.
The American Indian is a great symbolist. He does
not confine his illustrations to mere realistic
commentaries, on things that surround his everyday
life, nor does he content himself with making fantastic
designs devoid of meaning. He unites the science of
beauty in nature and art, with the intellectual appeal
and consistently uses this mode of decorative realism.
His art is the expression of a natural philosophy, which
is closely related to his religion and folklore. He
animated inanimate things just like our ancients. To
him the sun, the rain, thunder, moon, stars, and
rainbows were living beings. By making the picture of
a power, he believed he was making friends with it.
He believed that this relationship would help him gain
his wishes and help him defend himself against his
enemies. His art was first associated with a kind of
magic. His practical purpose, was no bar to normal
development in design, which we regard as aesthetic.
The culture of the Aztecs and their related tribes in the
Southwest all combine in their art, a magical purpose
with an aesthetic form.

25

1917.
According to the Aztec picture-chronicle I will
show herewith, they occupied Atzlan for two cycles
of fifty-two years, from about 960 A. D. to 1064 A.
D. Their tradition then said a bird appeared crying
“Tihui! Tihui!” which their oracles claimed meant “Let’s
go.” So they started from this region, surrounded by
plenty of water, and after forty-eight stops, all of which
are recorded here, they saw the sign they had searched
for, for two hundred and sixty-one years. It was a
Mexican eagle holding a snake in its beak and perched
on top of a cactus. This symbol is still recorded on the
Mexican coat of arms. The Aztecs said it was a sign,
they were to establish their city at that point, which
they did in 1325.

In this Picture Chronicle the point of starting the
Aztec peregrination is shown as a blue square near
the upper right-hand corner, with a bird above it calling
“Tihui” and rod-like figures coming from its mouth.
Figure two, shows the ten tribes of the Aztecs listening
to the birds, and in the lake are two heads appearing,
evidently of those who did not join the voyagers, and
another man appears in a canoe. The bundle of herbs
on the right of the lake means that they started their
pilgrimage at the beginning of a cycle of fifty-two years.
The phonetic hieroglyphics, over the heads of the
human figures represents their picture-name or crest.
The route of the peregrination is shown by the footprints
and the green circles represented the number of years
they stopped at the different places. These places are
represented by name-pictures, most of which have
been identified. This whole picture tells a story of the
Dr. Edgar L. Hewett, Director of the School of peregrination of the Aztecs covering a period of two
American Research, of the Archeological Institute of hundred and sixty-one years.
America, identifies Casas Grandes, Chihuahua, as being
We have the barbaric habit of always considering
the Atzlan of the ancient Aztecs. Here they erected a
others our inferiors and some of us look on the
big house composed of many terraced rooms, up to
cannibalistic religious practices of the Aztecs with
seven stories in height and covering an area of about
horror. Still how seldom we look for good qualities,
two hundred and fifty by eight hundred feet. It was
which are sometimes just as outstanding, as was shown
supposed to have been occupied by about six thousand
by Anita Brenner in her “Idols Behind Altars.” She
people. The Aztecs could have easily descended the
writes they were a people of enormous restlessness,
Mimbres River, to Lake Palomas and then followed
who enjoyed possession, not in the sense of acquisition,
the route to Casas Grande, as we did on foot with
but of control.
General Pershing’s troops in March, 1916. General
Pershing had his headquarters near the Casas Grandes,
They were fighters and the conquerors of Mexico.
during the Punitive Expedition in Mexico in 1916 and They might, in ancient times, be compared to the

26

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Romans, for the Aztecs adopted the culture of the
Toltecs, as the Romans did the culture of the Greeks.
Or this warlike nation, might, in their lust for power,
be compared with the people of a late European
Empire. They not only collected riches but also
beautiful, artistic things; the sweetest flowers; the finest
vases or artistically wrought jewels, but not the least
beautiful were the thoughts of others as were recorded
by Father Sahagun, the only great contemporary
writer, who had direct contact with the Aztecs. The
following is quoted from his Book VI, Chapter XIX:

we not all be glad to see the best of the Aztec principles
influence our modern life?
My object in showing these pictures and telling the
story of the Aztec influence on the primitive culture of
the Southwest is to create an interest in the life of the
early Americans and in their art, and to try to keep
some of the energy and wealth now being expended
abroad, for research in our own country where we
have such vast, unexplored fields.

Bibliography
“Do not lie,” the father said to his child. “This is
bad; for when you sin you spoil yourself, and you begin
Ancient Life in the American Southwest, Dr.
to die. It is a if you blurred the paintings of your deeds,
Edgar L. Hewett.
and broke or threw filth on the pool or mirror of your
soul.” The young girl was admonished, at the moment
Ancient Civilizations of Mexico, Herbert J.
when she “ceased to run and tumble on the ground, Spinden, Am. Museum of Natural History, 1928.
and began to exercise her reason,” in the following
Ancient Cities of the New World, Desire Charney,
manner by her mother:
Harper Bros., 1888.
“Do not adorn yourself profusely with over
Twenty-first Annual Report of the Bureau of
elaborate things, because this is a sign of little sense.
American Ethnology.
Neither must your garments be very poor, dirty, or
torn, because these are the signs of people who are
Handbook of the American Indian, Bureau of
laughable. When you speak, do not do so very fast American Ethnology, Part I and II, Bulletin No. 80.
and breathlessly, but little by little, and in measure; do
Additional Designs on Prehistoric Mimbres
not raise your voice, nor speak too low, but with a
Pottery, J. Walter Fewkes.
medium sound. Do not move much when you speak,
nor when you greet, and do not speak through your
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Volume
nose, but let your words be honest and of good sound. 76, No. 3.
Do not use strange words. When you walk do not go
Remains in Ancient Asia of a Race that Peopled
too fast nor too slow, for it is a sign of pride and pomp
America, Arls Hrdlicka, Smithsonian Miscellaneous
to go too slow, and too fast suggests disquiet and little
Reports, 1912.
surety. When it is necessary to jump over a puddle,
do so in such a manner that you seem neither heavy,
The Rain-Makers, Mary Roberts Coolidge,
clumsy, nor overlight. On the street and in the roads Houghton, Mifflin Co.,1928. Idols Behind Altars, Anita
do not carry your head hanging, nor yet must you raise Brenner.
it too high. That is a sign of bad breeding. You will go
Mexico, A Study of Two Americas, Stuart Chase,
straight, and with your head slightly inclined.”
McMillan Co., 1931.
“See likewise that you neither paint your face nor
Southwestern Archeology, Dr. A. V. Kidder,
your lips, in order to look well, since this is a mark of
Harvard University Press, 1925.
vile immodest women.”
Did Early Americans Hunt Ground Sloth?, Frank
I do not think people capable of having such
Thorne, “Science News-Letter,” Oct. 19, 1929.
beautiful, wholesome ideas could be wholly bad. We
all would be glad to see our children follow the kindly
advice of the Mexican mother to her off- spring. Would

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

27

A SMALL RUIN IN NEW MEXICO
BY MRS. EILEEN E. ALVES
When asked to give a report on archeological work
in the vicinity of El Paso, Texas, I decided to describe
a small mound high up in the Sacramento Mountains.
The location, about seven thousand feet high, is by the
side of a snow-fed mountain stream.
One of the facts which we so often notice about
pre-historic ruins is how many times the remains of
ancient man are found close to, or under the habitations
of present day man. At the little town of Swatz on the
Mimbres River in New Mexico, is a large
pueblo ruin, almost in the backyard of the
present houses. After three hundred
rooms and six hundred burials had been
excavated from this place, another ancient
building of much older date was unearthed
which was lying under the other walls at
almost the same angle. This was
excavated by Mr. and Mrs. C. B.
Cosgrove, who were doing this work for
the Peabody Museum at Cambridge. This
older site lay beneath the present level of
the river. For this reason the skeletons
were disintegrated, and in a powdered
condition. The pottery was also in the
same condition and little or nothing could
be ascertained, beyond the fact of the
teeming life that lived and loved and died,
and then made room for hundreds of
others who followed the same life cycle,
and who, in turn, made way for the
inhabitants of the sleepy, pretty little
Mexican settlement of Swatz.
At Phoenix, Arizona, remains of the
ancient irrigation ditches are found in the
town. Remains of bygone people are
undisturbed within a short distance of the
Capitol. A Phoenix man plowing his field
may turn up a few of the stone axes
peculiar to that part of Arizona, or strike
his plow against a buried metate or big
stone mortar, showing that where man has

once lived, by some strange rule he seems to choose
to live again. The reason for this is not always easy to
see, if the houses were located by some big spring of
water, or on a level flat in a river valley very suitable
for agriculture, or on a rocky hillside adapted to defense
purposes, one could understand this crowding together
of different generations of people. But in the great
spaces of the West, where one valley site is apparently
no better than another, it is difficult to understand the

PLATE 9
No. 17. Artifacts of Wood.
No. 18. Chupadero Black on White Pottery

28

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

reason for this piling of wall upon wall, of bones upon gooseberries, plums, acorns, and penones, as well as
bones of such different times and cultures.
other plants that the Indians used of which we know
nothing, an ideal spot then, as well as now.
Of this ruin in New Mexico, the same rule holds
good. This small heap of earth covered with tell tale
It would be premature to attempt to describe the
pottery sherds lies in a yard close to a ranch house, walls of this little house site, but we have preserved
and the ranch house borders on the little town of enough of the artifacts to make a very interesting
Lincoln, New Mexico. Lincoln is a village situated on collection coming from this small site.
the banks of the Bonita River, a few miles above its
I will describe the pottery first, as pottery seems to
confluence with the Ruidoso River, which flows into
be the great nucleus around which archeological
the Pecos. The valley here is narrow, with high juniper
discussion centers.
covered hills on both sides, with the pine covered
White Mountains in the near distance, and the rocky
Pottery
Capitans to the north, affording safe retreat to
marauding Indians.
A surface collection shows a great number and
variety of pottery sherds. Coiled, corrugated and
In the town is the remains of a circular stone building
incised ware exists in quite a large percentage. Red on
where the people gathered to defend themselves
terra cotta, Lincoln black on white, a few very small
against the attacking Indian hordes who came from
pieces of Gila Polychrome, plain red cooking ware,
the mountains to steal the horses and cattle and murder
and quantities of Chupadero black on white, which
the people who had dared to trespass on the hunting
was to be expected in a location only a few miles from
grounds which they had for so long considered their
the Chupadero Mesa where pure sites of this pottery
own. Tourists, farmers, cattle thieves, Indians, all were
gave its name to the ware. A few pieces of early glaze
there, and then, before the dawn of history, another
were found, but no Mimbres which was strange, as
people tilled this same soil, made their pottery, built
Mimbres is found in so many of these mountain sites.
their mud and stone houses and used the bow and
However time may change this list, and add other
arrow instead of the leaden bullet, and began that cycle
classes of pottery.
of lives that was to continue until the present time.
There were five complete food bowls. One is a
Driving down the Bonita it was by chance that I
Chupadero black on white in a very crude but
saw a metate being used as a watering pan for
interesting design. The other four are Lincoln black on
chickens, and a sherd covered mound turned into a
red. Two have simple designs extending into the bowl,
play ground for the ranch children. I was in time to
one is too burned to tell much about, and the fifth one
salvage a few of the artifacts which they had
has a very ornate band around the top, this almost
discovered, and I have hopes of eventually being
approaches a glaze.
allowed to excavate.
In addition to the food bowls there was also found
This site lies in a field offering no particular
an El Paso Polychrome olla. This is rather rarely found
advantages for defense, so evidently the inhabitants
in an entire piece.
had no great fear of attack. Enough level land lay
around it to afford plenty of room for raising crops,
Other complete pieces of pottery from here were
and the Bonito provided an ample water supply. In carried off before we knew of them. These were
the surrounding mountains game was plentiful. Deer, valuable as a whole but worthless scattered around
bear, wild turkey and squirrels are still to be found the country.
there, and I can remember when elk were often seen.
Another pottery object was a pipe three inches long.
There is plenty of wild fruit in season, delicious
It is very similar to one found at Three Rivers, and to
raspberries, wild strawberries, agarita berries,
some I recently saw from northern Arizona.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

29

Stone
In stone we have four little hammer heads, or tiny
mauls, with a groove all around the center and each
one only an inch and a quarter long. These may not be
uncommon, but I have not seen others like them.
A drill rather crudely worked, a red arrow point,
stones chipped and shaped as if for polishing pottery,
several manos and metates, and a turquoise pendant
of the usual shape make up the list of the stone work
so far.
Shell
In shell, only a large pendant with two holes bored
in it, and a large number of very badly preserved olivella
shell beads were found.
Bone
Bone is most beautifully represented by two
polished and carved awls, one of the usual shape and
size, and the other shaped like a long needle, and about
five inches long. Both are in a fine state of preservation.

Two hollow bone tubes made from the cannon bone
of a deer are of unknown use, unless they were used
for cases in which the polished and pointed awls were
kept when not in use.
Wood
There were also objects made of wood, one in
particular, being made something like a modern
mustard spoon. But alas, these rare wooden artifacts
were stolen by a passing traveler. Wooden objects
are not often found in open pueblos, as time and
weather together rot wood as well as fiber or cotton
fabrics, the protected cave shelter is the place to find
this sort of material, while the houses on the open plains
generally yield only stone, pottery or shell.
So far there has been a rich harvest from this little
site in the Sacramentos. At present we have not the
slightest idea of its age, but we are inclined to think it is
not very old as compared with sites not far away.

30

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

THE PRESENT STATUS OF TEXAS ARCHAEOLOGY
BY DR. J. E. PEARCE
This brief summary of what has been done and
of what remains to be done in Texas Archeology,
as understood by the writer, has been penned in the
hope that it may be of immediate interest to those
who are working in this field. A much more detailed
account is to be published in book form.
Importance of the Texas Field
Texas occupies a position in the geography of
North America which gives it large and unique
importance in the history of early human culture on
the North American continent. The three centers in
which Indian civilization reached its highest
development on this continent were (1) Southern
Mexico and Central America, the Maya Aztec area,
(2) the high plateau area of the upper Rio Grande
and adjacent regions, the Pueblo area, and (3) the
Mississippi Valley, the Mound Builder area. The
distinctive cultures of these areas possessed certain
fundamental culture elements that were common to
all but which could not have originated
independently in each of the centers. From known
facts they must have originated in one of the centers
and have been carried by diffusion to each of the
others. Among these culture elements may be
mentioned certain domesticated plants, such as
maize, tobacco, squashes, pumpkins, melons, and
beans, together with many of the methods of utilizing
these plants; sun and fire worship and the worship
of the rattlesnake.

periods. Texas lies directly across the line from
the old center to the Mississippi Valley and partially
across the lines from the Pueblo regions to the
Mississippi and from the Pueblo to South Mexico.
It follows certainly that if ever the problems of
North American culture history are worked out in
any complete and adequate way, much of their
solution will come from the exploration of Texas
archeological fields.
Again, the geography of Texas is so diversified
that it constitutes several distinct environments in
each of which the economic and social life of early
man was distinctive. A study of the cultural practices
peculiar to these areas and of the relations of the
different culture areas to one another cannot fail to
throw much light upon the problems of the relations
of culture to geography in general. Culturally the
Texas Indians were very far apart. They represent
the extremes of the most nomadic group in North
America, the Comanches, and one of the most
sedentary and most highly civilized groups, the
village-dwelling Caddoes. Furthermore the coast
tribes had an almost complete sea food economy
and lived in a way differing radically from the ways
of any and all of the others.

In addition, Texas has, as a whole, certain
distinctive geographical features and resources that
were reflected in the life of her ancient inhabitants.
The areas of Cretaceous outcroppings in Central
Texas contain large quantities of flint of a very fine
It is virtually certain that, of the respective
quality and this material was to primitive man what
cultures of these regions, that of Central America
iron is to present civilized man. Central Texas flint
and South Mexico is the oldest and that the culture
was sought by tribes far and near, and was in fact
elements named above originated there and spread
extensively quarried in places and was widely
to the other areas. We do not know however by
transported. As a consequence the arts of working
what route they moved northward, to which of the
flint reached a high state in Central Texas and flint
two northern areas they came first, whether they
implements take on a variety of form and character
came by migration in one or more movements, or if
in that region that is not only unique but highly
they came in the form of more or less continuous
illuminating.
contacts involving culture borrowing, or reciprocal
relations of give and take, over relatively long
In these same Cretaceous regions lie the great

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

31

springs that come up out of the Balcones Fault Line places. No such middens are found elsewhere in
and which constitute the source of more than one North America and in view of their number, size
important Texas river, examples the San Pedro and contents, probably nowhere else in the world.
Springs and the San Antonio River, the New
Braunfels Springs and the Comal River
and the San Marcos Springs and the San
Marcos River. Inasmuch as the Balcones
faulting occurred in Pliocene times, or, at
latest, early Pleistocene, these springs
have been in existence practically in their
present form from early Pleistocene times
to the present. Such places could not fail
to attract any kind of man and we must
expect to find about them traces of the
earliest human inhabitants of Texas.
Around all of these springs and along the
perennial streams below them are
numerous and extensive camp sites which
have certainly been occupied by man more
or less continuously since his first
appearance in Texas.
Many of these camp sites take on the
character of kitchen middens in which at
least three distinct culture levels have
been recognized and defined. These
middens, known locally as the “burnt rock
mounds,” are composed largely of
fragments of limestone coming from slabs
of this material that had been used in
cooking and for keeping fires together.
The flags of limestone were hardened by
the fire and made brittle with the result
that they broke into hard sharp-edged
fragments and were replaced by new
slabs. As a result of this practice, some
of the middens are of enormous
proportions. One at Cedar Park, eighteen
miles northwest of Austin, is six feet deep
in the middle and about 350 feet long by
150 feet wide.
These middens are ideal protection for
the things which they contain. In them are
found thousands of specimens of bones,
shells and artifacts of flint or other stone
that throw a flood of light upon the manner
of life of the early man who occupied these

PLATE 10
No. 19. Artifacts of Upper Level Texas Kitchen
Middens.
No. 20. Artifacts of the Middle Level.
No. 21. Artifacts of the Bottom Level.

32

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

The coastal region of Texas possesses large shell
mounds that extend, in some sections, almost
continuously around the bays and inlets of the Gulf
and that are highly revelatory of the life of the early
coast dwellers. These shell heaps are hard to work
and contain artifacts in smaller numbers than are
found in the burnt rock mounds, but in places they
are rich. Everywhere in this region is evidence of
pottery that is highly significant It is very probable
that at least one group of the bearers of Mound
Builder culture into the Mississippi Valley came
up out of Mexico and passed along the Texas coast.
The writer hopes to prove that this was the case.
He has considerable evidence to that effect already.

Texas University students of History. Mrs. Mattie
A. Hatcher’s three papers are the most notable. All
have appeared in the Southwestern Historical
Quarterly.
Additional publications of like character from
the old Spanish sources are now appearing in the
“Preliminary Studies of the Tesas Catholic
Historical Society.” These contain the diaries and
notes of early Catholic missionaries in Texas and
often such papers contain valuable detailed
accounts of the Indian tribes and of their manners
and customs.

Otherwise Texas is ethnologically unknown.
Moreover this situation is largely irretrievable.
In East Texas is an area of deep forests closely
Many of the tribes, like the Tonkawa, the
related in climate and geography generally to the
Karankawa and Coahuiltican tribes have
lower Mississippi Valley. This part belongs
completely disappeared, while others, like the
culturally to the Mound Builder area and it is one
Comanches, and the Caddoes, are being broken up
of the richest regions archeologically in the United
and assimilated so that all traces of their old tribal
States. Its distinctive significance as compared with
life will soon vanish where they have not already
Arkansas, Louisiana and other parts of the Mound
disappeared.
Builder area lies in the relations that may be worked
out in Texas between the cultural practices that
The neglect of the ethnology of Texas puts a heavy
belong to the forested areas and those that belong emphasis on the necessity of doing everything
to the prairies and plains. Probably nowhere else possible with Texas archeology.
in North America is the transition from forest to
Much creditable work has been done here and
prairie and from prairie to plain so sharp and so
there by amateur archeologists but some of these
complete.
have lacked funds and time, and some,
unfortunately, have lacked an adequate knowledge
What Has Been Done
of what to look for and how to work.
The study of Texas Indian life has been
To attempt to enumerate these workers and to
scandalously neglected in the development of field
evaluate their work would take more time and space
anthropology in North America. Virtually nothing
than can be had for the task here.
is known of the ethnology of the early Texas tribes.
A little has been done with the Kiowas and Apaches
Professional archeologists are scantily
by the Bureau of American Ethnology and a brief represented in the Texas field. Archeologists
account of the Karankawa was worked out by representing the Museum of the American Indian,
Gatschet and published in the early Peabody Phillips Academy and the Museum of the University
Museum reports. A little sketchy information about of Pennsylvania have done some reconnaissance
the Texas tribes, mainly of an historical rather than work and exploration in Texas. The writer has
ethnological character, has been published by carried on archeological research under the
Bolton in his two-volume work, Mezieres, and in auspices of (1) the Smithsonian Institution, (2) the
the Hand Book of the American Indian. Some University of Texas, and, at times, as a matter of
papers consisting of translations from the reports personal enterprise. In describing this work in detail
of the Spanish friars have been published by it is more convenient from this point on to write in
members of the Texas Historical Association and the first person.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
I worked with Smithsonian funds in the years
1918, 1919, and 1920, in research on the Central
Texas kitchen middens and in working out a hasty
archeological survey of the State. I then worked
alone on my private resources using some student
aid and labor, until the Rockefeller Grant was made
to the University of Texas in 1927-28. I have shared
in this fund to the extent of $3000 to $6000 per
year and with it have done much the greater part of
the research in Texas archeology that has been done
under institutional auspices to the present time.
I have explored between thirty and forty of the
burnt rock kitchen middens, a dozen or more caves
and rock shelters of the Edwards Plateau, some
thirty-five camp sites and burial places in the Caddo
regions along the Red River and in northeast Texas,
and have examined by trenching various shell
heaps, burial places and camp sites of the coastal
region.
In Central Texas, in the broken hilly country of
the Cretaceous outcroppings, I have found three
types of early culture represented in stratified levels
of the larger mounds, the lowest a crude pure hunter
type, the middle a higher hunter type with a great
multiplicity of flint implements but without the bow
and with little if any horticulture, and the upper
representing a much finer culture with the bow and
arrow and considerable horticulture. Like the
others, however, the top layer culture is essentially
a hunter type. It is certain that the upper layer
culture has much in common with the general culture
of East Texas. This is indicated by the types of
flint chipping, the few fragments of potsherds found
and the types of grinding stones. The people of this
last or upper culture level probably came out of
East Texas and under the influence of their new
environment, gave up much of the life of their East
Texas homes and fell into the life of nomad hunters.
They ceased to make pottery, cultivated crops but
little, and emphasized hunting and its concomitant
arts of skin dressing and meat curing.
The quantity of artifacts and other materials
found is not necessarily significant in making
interpretations, but, because of possibilities of
rounding out collections by exchange, quantities

33

of returns from field work may have large
significance for a Texas State Museum in the years
to come. For this reason, I shall occasionally
mention the quantities of things found in my field
work.
In exploring these mounds I have recovered
probably 10,000 first class specimens of flint
implements including arrow points, spear heads, axe
blades, and celts, fist axes (coup de poings), skin
scrapers, knives, drills, adzes, etc., etc. I have found
probably tons of bones of the animals hunted and
eaten, including those of the bison, badger, dog, deer,
Lynx (bobcat), rabbit, squirrel, turkey, and even man.
Several of the burnt rock mounds explored contained
the remains of cannibal feasts. In some instances
the splintered human bones, broken up to get at the
marrow, had been gathered up and buried in cists in
the burnt rock mounds.
On the coast the situation is very complex. The
surface and top layers indicate a complicated culture
that seems to have degenerated from cultural
practices of a higher order. Everywhere there are
large quantities of sherd but nowhere so far as I
know are there whole pots. Evidences of agriculture
are uncertain. More over the cultural practices
change in a strange, almost unaccountable way, as
one proceeds along the coast. Around Brownsville,
as indicated by Mr. A. E. Anderson’s collections,
is evidence of much hunting and everywhere are
numerous shell artifacts. Even arrow heads and spear
heads are often of shells as are also axes, scrapers
and knives. Around Corpus Christi are enormous
shell heaps of oyster and conch shells mixed with
fish bones and along the beach sands, where in some
places old camp sites are being eaten away by the
sea, are enormous quantities of sherd from a high
grade of pottery. During the summer of 1930, with
the assistance of Mr. George C. Martin of Rockport,
I did considerable reconnaissance and some
excavating in the shell heaps of this region. Digging
up these old shell mounds is rather difficult. They
are composed chiefly of oyster shells and the shells
of dwarf conch, which are often cemented together
with earth and mineral deposits, so that the beds
are hard to penetrate. As all of the conch shells have
holes in them, made with a blow of hammer or axe,

34

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

they were undoubtedly eaten and give positive
evidence of the essential kitchen midden nature of
these extensive reefs. This region will require a lot
more work before anything like a complete
interpretation of it can be arrived at.
What was probably a very ingenious fire-making
and fire-keeping apparatus was found by Kingsville
professors and students in a coast burial at Riviera
Beach. It is a trumpet like tube of stone about nine
inches long with a mouth piece of bone from the
human arm. The specimen when found contained
crushed asphalt and vegetable matter which had
probably been packed over live coals. A smoldering
fire could probably be carried in this apparatus for
days. Other specimens are in the possession of Mr.
A. E. Anderson of Brownsville, Mr. Albert
Nowotny of New Braunfels and of the State Library
at Austin.

America. I have found remains (in some places in
quantities) of a small dog of peculiar anatomical
characters. These remains, of exactly the same type
of dog, have been found from near Longview to
Brownsville. Moreover some of the potsherd
around Brownsville shows unmistakable characters
of Haustecan origin. The historical Haustecs of the
Tampico coast region are a branch of the Mayas
and are supposed to represent the first cultural
movement out of their early home up the coast to
the north. A group of them may have been one of the
emigrant waves out of Mexico that constituted the
ancestors of the Mound Builders, and this may be a
part of the explanation of the beginnings of the
Mound Builder culture.

I began intensive work in East Texas in the
summer of 1930. My reconnaissance in that part
under the auspices of the Bureau of American
Ethnology in 1918-1920 had led me to suppose that
Around Trinity and Galveston Bays above
I should find this part of the State rich in
Galveston are extensive shell reefs which have
archeological material of a high order but my
much the semblance of kitchen middens. With the
success in locating rich sites and in recovering such
aid of Dr. A. R. Shearer of Montbelvieu, I explored
materials as pottery, stone implements and shell
several of these. They contain potsherd throughout,
beads and ornaments from camp sites and from
and are composed chiefly of clam shells of one
nearby burial grounds was astonishing. Altogether
species, a Cardium. Careful examination proved
during the first summer we secured nearly 1,000
them to be reefs built up by the combined action of
specimens of pottery alone, that is, of whole pots
streams and waves and that the presence of the sherd
or of specimens capable of restoration. Many of
was due to its shell-like form, which enabled the
these are remarkable for their symmetry and beauty
waves to get under it and throw it upward as they
of form and for the delicacy and beauty of the incised
do the shells.
designs executed on them both before and after
The Galveston Bay sherd differs materially from firing.
that about Corpus Christi though both contain many
Mr. Burleigh Gardner, Tutor in Anthropology,
specimens of fine quality. About Corpus Christi
has written his master’s thesis on the decorative
many specimens show application of asphalt for
designs on this pottery. He copied about eighty
water proofing on one or both surfaces; about
separate and distinct designs and did not exhaust
Galveston Bay I saw no signs whatever of any
the returns from the first summer’s work. In fact,
application of asphalt but much evidence of the
many of the specimens that are in pieces are still in
application of slips and paint. The forms of
the boxes in which they were packed when dug up.
decoration on pottery in both regions differ
We haven’t the funds sufficient to keep the laboratory
radically from those found in East Texas proper,
work up with the field work.
where many designs are incised and many are of
the raised applique type.
Mr. A. T. Jackson, the field foreman, brought in
from one site in Franklin County 154 specimens of
The unraveling of all of the problems of the coast
pottery, two magnificent specimens of flint
will take time, labor and patience but cannot fail to
ceremonial knives, many plaques, pearl beads, celts,
be very important for the history of culture in
arrow points, some fragments of copper ornaments,

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
and other objects, all of which he had obtained in
about a week of active field work with three trained
assistants. Several of the specimens he brought in
from this trip were exceedingly beautiful and of
types that had not been found before in Texas.

35

these were in a lamentable condition due to the
carelessness and roughness of the farmer in getting
them out. Moreover, he destroyed more than he got
out, gathered no archeological evidence except that

During the summer of 1931, I sent two
expeditions into the field, one under Mr.
Gardner, to the coast around Galveston
Bay and one under Mr. Jackson,
mentioned above, to Wood, Upshur and
Harrison Counties. Jackson was very
early incapacitated by an automobile
accident, and I had to move Gardner to
northeast Texas and put both forces
under him.
Early in the summer this combined
force of seven men uncovered a rich
burial site on the H. R. Taylor farm near
Ore City, Harrison County, and spent
about half of the summer at this place.
They obtained at this site between
500 and 800 specimens of pottery alone.
The exact number cannot be known until
the restoration work in the laboratory has
been completed. In addition, we got
many beautiful arrow points, all of one
type, and all of which had been buried
in quivers of arrows with many
specimens of ground axes, grind stones,
personal ornaments and artifacts.
Near the middle of the summer
Jackson returned to work and I sent the
combined crews to the T. M. Sanders
farm on Red River in northwest Lamar
County.
For variety of high grade materials
found, for quantity and high quality of
beads, gorgets and shell work, all of
conch shells brought up from the coast,
for the uniqueness and beauty of designs
in pottery, this, the Sanders site, has been
the most interesting in which we have
worked. We purchased some specimens
which had been plowed up and collected
by the owner of the place but many of

PLATE 11
No. 22. Fire Keeping Device from Coast Burial.
No. 28. Caddo Bottles from Red River District.
No. 24. Fine Carved Shell Gorget from Caddo Area on
Red River.

36

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

contained in the few specimens obtained and ruined
the parts in which he dug for later scientific
research. We got from this place nearly five
thousand specimens of conch shell beads, several
highly worked shell hair ornaments, a dozen or more
beautiful and intricately carved shell gorgets and
several dozen beautiful specimens of pottery, some
of double and triple compartment form.

Throughout the East Texas region are extensive
mounds that are probably burial or funeral mounds
in character, but they are too large and will require
so much time, labor and money for proper
exploration that I have not as yet attempted to explore
any of them.

I have just had trenched, June, 1932, one large
mound on the banks of the Guadalupe in the Coast
At neither of the above mentioned places were region, known in local archives and land records
there any traces of white contact. At the Sanders as the Morhiss mound and situated about eight miles
place the skeletal remains were so well preserved below Victoria. My field force, under Mr. A. T.
that the burials could not have been over a few Jackson and Mr. A. M. Woolsey, has just finished
hundred years old and one group burial of five cutting through this mound along the short diameter
skeletons was removed intact. At the Taylor farm, with a trench four feet wide and down to hard pan.
all of the sixty-four burials encountered showed This mound is 610 feet long by 300 feet wide and
great age and from some all traces of human remains nearly twenty feet high. Within this narrow trench
had disappeared. In these old burials the same types we found 26 burials, 32 flint implements, and a
of artifacts, especially of arrow heads, were found few, very few, potsherds, some insignificant shell
as in the recent burials, from which I judge that the ornaments, and some fragments of animal bones.
historical Caddoes, who occupied most of the All bones were found to be highly mineralized and
Northeast Texas region when the whites first came evidenced relatively great age. Much additional
in. must have been in undisturbed possession of work will have to be done in this region before the
this region for a long time. They were probably not full significance of this mound can be determined.
merely descendents of the Mound Builders but were
Mound Builders and were practicing that culture
when the whites came.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

37

THE RELATION OF THE SOUTHWESTERN BASKET MAKER TO
THE DRY SHELTER CULTURE OF THE BIG BEND
BY VICTOR J. SMITH
No doubt collectors interested in assembling
Indian specimens, have for many years discovered
articles which were they now available with
accurate records for study, would yield much
valuable information concerning the ancient
inhabitants of the Big Bend of Texas. So far as we
know, however, no attempt was made to keep
careful records of locations, depth of finds,
associated artifacts, etc., until after the
establishment of the Sul Ross State Teachers
College at Alpine in 1920. Several interested faculty
members, who were later to organize a museum
under the auspices of the West Texas Historical and
Scientific Society, began to collect specimens, keep
field notes, photographic records, label specimens,
observe parallel finds elsewhere, and to assemble
data of value for later study and comparison. At
that time, however, we little suspected that our finds
were not only strikingly similar to those found in
districts more directly in the southwestern area but
also to the Basket Maker culture. Mr. Edwin R.
Smith of Austin first called our attention to this
similarity. I had described our museum specimens
to Mr. Smith during a trip to Austin and he later
wrote me, enclosing clippings, and otherwise
calling attention to the fact that our artifacts were
strikingly similar to true Basket Maker materials. I
was not convinced, but at every opportunity
undertook to study the characteristics of Basket
Maker culture.
A second step related to the topic of this paper
occurred in 1926 at which time I wrote a short
article describing the dry rock shelter finds in West
Texas for the Anthropologist.* While this article
was written with the idea of assisting in tracing the
origin of the Ozark Bluff Dwellers, sites of which
had just been investigated by M. R. Harrington,
Museum of the American Indian, it served a double
purpose in calling attention to the exceedingly close
parallel of our Texas finds to those of Earl H.
Morris, as reported in the thirty-third Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology. Articles discovered by Morris

in these New Mexico and Arizona sites which are
almost identical with artifacts found in the Big Bend
of Texas are: reed arrow fragments (in shallow areas
only in Texas), sharpened wooden sticks, fire sticks,
coiled fiber material (possibly basket rests), bone
awls, rush matting, coiled baskets (Morris does not
give his weave analysis but the illustration is similar
to the Big Bend type of basket), a variety of matting,
and miscellaneous yucca articles and foodstuff.
Here the comparison ends as Morris reported
abundant pottery and buildings which are entirely
absent in Texas localities.
Another development in the line of present
interest occurred with the receipt of Dr. A. V.
Kidder’s book, “An Introduction to Southwestern
Archeology,” and J. L Nusbaum’s, “A Basket Maker
Cave in Kane County, Utah” contained in the Indian
Notes, Heye Foundation, 1922. This volume
includes also a report by Kidder and Guernsey
concerning their examination of Nusbaum’s finds
in which is a valuable supplement to their former
report in Bulletin 65 of the Bureau of Ethnology.
All of these volumes have assisted greatly in making
possible the development of a list of distinguishing
characteristics of true Basket Maker as contrasted
with other neighboring types. Kidder recognizes and
refers to the transitory periods between Basket
Maker and post-Basket Maker, and post-Basket
Maker and pre-Pueblo. Since many characteristics
of one period extend into the next, we find an
explanation as to the similarity of certain finds by
Morris with those of earlier periods. Other authors
recognizing Basket Maker characteristics are:
Montgomery, Prudden, Pepper, Judd, and Fewkes.
In our annual report to Dr. Carl E. Guthe, Editor
of the American Research Council’s annual report
on Archeological Field Work in North America
(1929), we reported, “A culture closely resembling
Basket Maker” found in the Big Bend. In the same
report Dr. Clark Wissler says that Dr. R. L. Olson,
American Museum Staff, found, “skeletal material

38

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

and artifacts which may determine possible affinity
with the Basket Maker horizon.” The evidence here
referred to was unearthed near Brackettsville,
Texas, somewhat to the east of the Big Bend proper.
Also in the same report, Director G. G. Heye,
Museum of the American Indian, mentioned the
work of M. R. Harrington (1928) and E. F.
Coffin (1929), at Eagle Canyon, south of
Marathon, Texas. A variety of baskets and
other woven articles were found at Eagle
Canyon as well as near the Devil’s River to
the east. We must await the published report
of the Heye Foundation before confirming the
rumor that the atl-atl was found by their
investigators. Mr. Heye, however, had
previously reported, “older deposits * * * *
suggesting a type of culture related to the
Basket Maker.”
A still less cautious announcement than I
had hitherto made was contained in Bulletin
No. 3 of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Abilene, 1931, in
which attention was called to the close
resemblance of the Big Bend materials to
Basket Maker types. At that time material had
just come into the museum which seemed to
justify the claim, namely, several throwing
(rabbit) sticks and a shaft with a fore-shaft
which has every appearance of a true atl-atl
shaft. The true throwing member of an atl-atl,
however, is missing and we know of no find
in west Texas justifying the claim of being
identical with the type of throwing device used
by the southwestern Basket Maker. This elusive
but all important implement, however, may yet
be found, in fact, I know of no site in New
Mexico, Arizona, or elsewhere, which has
yielded these distinguishing artifacts in
abundance. F. H. Roberts, Bureau of Ethnology,
Washington, in Publication No. 3009 of the
Smithsonian Institution, does not report the
finding of the atl-atl but has stated that the caves
near El Paso showed evidences comparable
to those of the Basket Makers. Roberts reports
numbers of items identical with the finds of
the Big Bend, prominently mentioned are
sandals, rabbit sticks, and netting.

Up to this point I have attempted to sketch the
progress in establishing the claim for a type of
Basket Maker culture peculiar to the Big Bend and
to indicate some of the sources for the tabulation of

No. 25.
No. 26.
No. 27.
No. 28.

PLATE 12
Typical Big Bend Rock Shelter.
Probably an Atl-Atl.
Big Bend Throwing Sticks of Basket
Maker Type.
Coiled Basket.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
typical Basket Maker characteristics in the left
column following. In the right column I have
indicated the comparisons as based upon my own
work and a limited amount of contact with reliable
investigators such as Harrington and Coffin, and
Setzler whose investigation is under way in southern
Brewster County as I write. No doubt, when the
published reports of these men are available, a more

39

reliable column of “Big Bend Evidence” can be
developed. (See Table 1.)
This brings us to a consideration of items of
major importance concerning which I wish to quote
one paragraph by Kidder with reference to the
Basket-maker culture:
“No trace of the use of the bow and arrow has
ever been found. The projectiles of the
Basket Maker were light darts four or
five feet long hurled by means of the
spear thrower or atl-atl, a device
intended to add greater length and
therefore greater propulsive force to the
arm. The most striking difference
between the Basket Maker culture and
that of the other peoples * * * * is the
absence of true pottery. A few unbaked
clay dishes of the crudest sort have been
found * * * *.
We are now able to conclude our
tabulation with four items which seem
to be of major importance as compared
to those previously listed: (See Table 2)

No. 29.
No. 30.
No. 31.
No. 32.

PLATE 13
Six Warp Yucca Sandal.
Checker Weave Yucca Sandal.
Two Fiber Bags.
Unusual Soft Yucca Fiber Sandal.

In spite of my frequent use of the term
“Basket Maker” I hold no brief favoring
such a name for the old culture
represented in the Big Bend. A complete
tabulation of comparisons with Mr.
Harrington’s finds in the Ozarks might
as well justify our calling the Texas
materials “Bluff Dwellers” since much
of the culture evidence is closely parallel
to that found in the Ozarks, particularly
in the use of old baskets and grasses for
pit lining. Enough material, however, has
been accumulated to deserve an
identifying name for the older culture
extending from El Paso to the Devil’s
River. For some time we have used the
term “Big Bend Culture” as descriptive
of the area. Evidence points to the fact
that this culture was not only preColonial but may be assumed to be of
considerable antiquity. This question of
age must receive further study before any
definite conclusions are reached.

40

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

In referring to the “deeper finds” the reader has
probably assumed a top layer of more recent
deposits. This is the case at a number of sites. At
others the stratification is poor and masses of rock
mixed with debris preclude any record save the
location and depth of the find. Exact differences
between “top layer” and deeper finds will be
evident when more detailed descriptions of certain
sites with complete tabulations of specimens found
are available. I am indebted to F. M. Setzler, U. S.
National Museum, for calling attention to the typical
coiled basket technique of the Big Bend, a bifurcated weave concerning which little reference
material is now available.
It is believed by the writer that the culture herein
discussed for the Big Bend must be worked out
before many difficult questions concerning the
whole Southwest can be answered. What was the
relation of the Big Bend cave dweller to the
southwestern Basket Maker and to similar cultures

in old Mexico? Did the Ozark Bluff Dweller migrate
from or to the southwestern area? The historical
and rather temporary occupation of West Texas by
the Comanche can be herein ignored. But what of
the Mescalari Apache who is known to have
occupied the area for many years prior to inroads
by other Indians and whites from the east? Are we
crediting to an older culture the artifacts actually
left by these Apaches? This we very much doubt.
Recent years have extended the Basket Maker
horizon. Harrington found this culture in Nevada.
Kidder states that a similar culture occupies a part
of New Mexico and extends as far as Mexico. He
also predicts that such evidence will be discovered
in yet more remote areas. It is possible that Dr.
Kidder’s prediction has been partially fulfilled in
the Big Bend area of Texas.
* Published April, 1927.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

41

A Tabulation Comparing Basket Maker Culture With Evidence
Found in the Big Bend of Texas
TABLE 1
True Basket Maker
A. Minor Items
1. Natural, undeformed skulls.
2. Used buckskin.
3. Basket mending practiced.
4. Used lumps of red pigment and other colors.
5. Made petroglyphs.
6. Made pictographs.

7. Three square shouldered human figures, 7-8 feet
high reported from one Basket Maker site.
8. Many handprints.
9. Bone awl used.
10. Vegetable fiber string found.
11. Carefully made implements.
12. Art of twined woven bag makings.
13. Lived in caves. Caves used in severe weather.
Combined caves with open camp. Used caves for
storehouse and burials.
14. Crop storage. Cists built of stone.

15. Mortuary offerings: food, tools, weapons,
ornaments, and basketry.
16. Used diagrams and colors on basketry.
17. Made fur cloth.
18. Were of medium stature.
19. Made large panniers.
20. Baskets commonly associated with burials.
“Killed” baskets.
21. Grew corn of primitive variety. Seed rows
from Utah Basket Maker cave vary from 10 to 18
rows. White and red cobs.

Big Bend Evidence

1. No deformed skulls found.
2. Bits of buckskin found.
3. One specimen so amended.
4. A variety of pigments found.
5. Three petroglyph sites found.
6. Many pictographs observed. Note: The typical
square shouldered man of the basketmaker is not
found among Big Bend petroglyphs nor pictographs.
7. At one Big Bend site there are three such figures
of similar size but the shoulder “squareness” is not
pronounced.
8. Seven “hand print” locations.
9. Many bone awls found.
10. Hundreds of bits of fiber string recovered. Size
range 1-16” to 1-4”.
11. A number of implements found indicating care
and skill in the making.
12. Several such specimens found. Cordage
fragments suggest mesh and other types of bags.
13. Lived in caves and shelters. Most Big Bend
sites have open camp signs near the occupied cave
or shelter. Used caves for storage but not to the
extent reported by Nusbaum.
14. Harrington and Coffin discovered cist like
structures of stone at Eagle Canyon. Small pits lined
with basket fragments, grasses, etc., at Bat Cave.
15. Similar mortuary offerings found. Burials
associated with use of matting. Infant or child burial
probably in matting bags.
16. Several specimens, including an 18” gourd, have
such use of color.
17. None as such. One specimen using fur in making
net bag.
18. Skeletal remains indicate medium stature.
19. Two such specimens found. Other fragments.
20. Same practice observed. One basket in burial
with center missing.
21. Numbers of cobs of primitive size. Rows 8 to
12. White cobs.

42

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

22. No side loops. Typical square toes missing.
Fringed toes missing. Five types located: fish tail
(yucca), fish tail (grasses), six warp yucca, crushed
yucca.
23. None found to date.
23. No beans or cotton.
24. None found.
24. Loom used sparingly.
25. Coiled basketry in large quantities. Two-twigs- 25. Similar shapes and sizes. 4 to 8 coils and 5 to
and-bundle. 4½ to 5 coils and 8 to 11 stitches to the 11 stitches to the inch. No twig and bundle type.
All coiled baskets are “bifurcated weave,” using
inch. Bowl shaped baskets.
bundle and V shaped stitches which are
characteristic.
26. Several other types observed.
26. Other types of fine basketry.
27. The same.
27. Used native vegetable and animal foods.
28. The same.
28. Little or no evidence of body clothing.
29. Small specimens found.
29. Dressed leather.
30. The same. Olivella missing save in El Paso
30. Seed and stone beads.
Area.
31. Very few found.
31. Various uses of feathers.
32. None identified.
32. Cradles.
33. Several types of matting found: checker, twilled,
33. Matting of grass and yucca
and twined. Pierced reed on string with woven
selvidge.
22. Elaborate sandal weaves. Human hair ties.

A Tabulation Comparing Basket Maker Culture With Evidence
Found in the Big Bend of Texas
TABLE 2
True Basket Maker
1. Absence of true pottery.

2. No trace of the bow and arrow.

3. Use of the atl-atl. Foreshaft 3 3-4” to 6 3-4”
long. Distal end 3-8” to 1-2” in diameter. Length 3’
6” to 4’ 2” (Cave DuPont). Foreshaft point tanged;
5-8” to 1” wide; 1 1-2” to 2 1-4” long. “Holes in
socketed specimens *** seven-sixteenths inch in
diameter at the mouth.”
4. Throwing (rabbit) sticks. Characteristics: carved
lines, curved shape, etc.

Big Bend Evidence
1. Entire absence of pottery save for a few small
surface sherds at open camps, and several pieces
crudely fashioned and unbaked.
2. A few fragments of reed arrow shafts have been
found in shallow cave deposits. None in deeper
excavations. No bows nor fragments.
3. One shaft with foreshaft in place. Exposed
foreshaft 3 3-16” long and 7-16” in diameter. Total
4” (?). Distal end 5-8” diameter. Proximal end
missing. Now 2’ 9 3-8” long. Point is typical shape,
3-4” wide and 2” long.
4. Five specimens and one fragment of typical
shape, size, wrapping, carving, and material.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

43

ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH IN CENTRAL WEST TEXAS
BY DR. CYRUS N. RAY
The solution of many of the archeological problems
of the Abilene district await the attention of some
individual or institution having sufficient funds and
interest in pure science to excavate camp sites buried
from eight to twenty-four to twenty-seven feet deep.
Out of one charcoal stratum site, buried twenty-four
feet deep, erosive forces left exposed in place, three
whole flint blades, one other nearly whole, and the
point tip of a fifth. Despite some opinions otherwise,
the patterns of these artifacts do not resemble those
found in Burnt Rock mounds. Many man made flint
flakes were also found exposed in place. A picture of
this bank appeared in the Society’s 1930 Bulletin
opposite to page 56.
Nothing But Bones in Prehistoric Graves
Many of the Indian Burial sites in this section have
been destroyed either by readers of current treasure
hunting fiction books who take their stories seriously
or by arrow head collectors who imagine that every
aboriginal grave must be full of arrow heads. Of the
many undisturbed graves opened by the writer in the
Abilene region not one contained an arrow head which
could definitely be said to come from a grave. In one
instance one small bird point was later found in the soil
from the excavation and might have come from the
grave. In another instance two shell beads were found
but the greater number yielded nothing but bones. In
no instance has anything of intrinsic value been found,
and it is very unfortunate that people who care nothing
for the preservation of the bones of these curious human
types for scientific study continue to excitedly dig into
every rock pile found. The only basis locally for such
beliefs besides the wild stories in current fiction books
is the fact that the historic Comanches and other historic
tribes did bury a few old guns and glass beads with
their burials, which were either in rock piles on the
tops of prominent mountains or were thrust back into
crevices in ledges of rocks, and then covered with
loose stones. Nearly all such burials were early seen
to be the work of man and destroyed. No undisturbed
Indian grave of the historic period has ever been found
by the writer.

Scientific Values Destroyed
Considerable useless destruction of the flexed stone
grave burials has been done by treasure hunters who
ruthlessly destroyed the curiously shaped skeletons in
a mad hunt after non-existent relics. Fortunately the
rocks of these graves are usually so deeply buried
beneath the soil that it requires erosion to reveal them
or there is too little showing on the surface to attract
the untrained eye.
Pottery and Scraper Sites
Pottery sherds are found in sites scattered over the
whole region. Thus far neither whole bowls nor pieces
of any size have been found. Most of the pottery sherds
have been found in sites buried only within plow depth,
but there are indications that one site covered with
three feet of deposited soil also contains pottery. Types
of pottery include both thick and thin, light brown, plain
undecorated and unpainted ware. Thick scratched,
brushed, incised and finger nail print decorations, coal
black in color inside and brown outside are found.
Pottery Sites Contain Unpatinated Flint
All of the pottery sites contain abundant blue
unpatinated flint scrapers which are usually of the large
pear shaped keel backed type. There are also a few
pottery sites which contain very small, finely worked,
narrow oval scrapers, pointed at one end. The pottery
sites contain in addition to plain unbevelled knives,
pointed at each end, another type which has four
beveled cutting edges.
The bevelled knives are larger at one end and are
beveled from the place of maximum width, which is
from a fourth to a third of the distance from one end,
in each direction on each side to the points at the ends.
This beveling in opposite directions produces four
different cutting edges on each knife.
There are two characteristic forms of small arrow
or bird points found in pottery sites. One type is flat
on one side and finely and minutely chipped on the

44

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

other down to points of almost needle sharpness. It
has long sharp barbs, a long slender pointed stem,
and some of this type have beautifully made minute
serrated edges. The general outline is that of a columnar
cedar or of a slender fir tree.
There is another type of finely chipped point of
slightly elongated triangular shape. It also is some times
flat on one side, but it usually is chipped on both sides.
This point is neither barbed nor stemmed, but is slightly
recessed at the base and this has an indentation in its
center. Near the base of the blade a notch is also cut
into the edge on each side. This type of projectile point
appears to have been found over a vast territory
extending from Central West Texas to the Pacific
Coast. A study of the total area of distribution of this
form of artifact might prove enlightening in explaining
some of the routes of travel of prehistoric peoples
and cultures. This type occurs not only in the more
recent unpatinated flint sites but also in the heavily
patinated “Sand Dune Blowout Culture” complex.
One patinated point of this type was dug out of a
horizontally stratified charcoal layer in a high eroding
creek bank at a measured depth of four feet from the
surface. So it is evident that this form of artifact is not
only widely distributed but quite old.
Pottery and Keel Backed
Scrapers Relatively Recent

Material from a plow depth site on Elm Creek may be
separated in this manner and it then appears to the
writer that a different technique was used and the shapes
are also different. There may have been erosion at this
point after the first deposition of patinated scrapers
and then another camp was made and more scrapers
were left a few hundreds or a few thousands of years
later and then the plow turned them all up together. If
in Texas patination of flint progressed at anything like
the slow rate estimated by the British Museum for
English flints (4,000 years) then some of the patinated
artifacts are rather old.
Rock Mound Cremated Burial
Three burials have been excavated by the writer
during the past year. A grass covered hill rises from
close beside the Clear Fork of the Brazos River and
on its eroded sides out-crop many signs of a covered
camp site. On the highest point a small bush covered
mound existed, the elevation of which did not seem to
quite follow the natural contour of the rest of the hill,
and from its soil the tips of several rocks projected.
Assisted by Prof. Otto Watts the writer early in 1929
attempted to excavate it. The top of the mound
appeared to be composed mostly of wind deposited
soil. The mound center was filled with flat limestone
slabs two feet or more long and ten or twelve inches
wide. These were set up endwise in the mound very
close together but with no symmetrical circular cist
arrangement such as the usual stone grave of this region
shows. The mound was also much larger than usual.
The stones were so large, long, and wedged in endwise
so tightly, that after digging for some time in the hard
dry soil between them and finding the hole still full of
rocks and no definite signs that it was not a natural soil
covered rock pile we abandoned the digging on the
approach of a thunder storm. However despite the fact
that hard caliche deposits had formed in the sandy loam
between the rocks since the pile had been made and
the soil apparently was too hard to have ever been
disturbed, the writer had always been unsatisfied and
suspected that after all the rock mass might have been
artificially formed.

It seems that the typical pear shaped keel backed
scraper and pottery are not only associated in camp
sites but that both were of comparatively recent
introduction in the Abilene section although several
other scraper types are found in various much older
flint cultures. Most of the pottery and unpatinated
scraper sites also contain bones and teeth of bison
and other large animals. In several pottery sites a few
flakes of obsidian have been found. No material of
this kind is known to exist within several hundreds of
miles to the west. The number of the unpatinated
scraper sites and the abundance of artifacts in them
would seem to indicate either a thick occupation of
the country or a long period of thin occupation. While
most of the pear shaped keel backed scrapers are
So this year after a heavy rain the writer again
unpatinated there are some sites where patinated spots
cleared the hole out and resumed work. Finally after
are clouding the flint and others where a complete
much prying loose of tightly wedged stones set endwise,
gray coating impervious to light has covered them.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
at a depth of three feet a large flat stone was found
lying horizontally in the bottom of the hole. It seems
that all of the long flat stones had had one end resting
on top of this stone to hold it down. Under the center

45

of this large horizontal stone there was an oval deposit
of calcined bones about a foot long and six inches
wide. These bones were in very small fragments, most
of them less than a half inch in length. It appeared as
though the bones had been burned almost
to ash elsewhere and then put into some
perishable container and buried under the
rock. The oval symmetrical shape of the
bone deposit would indicate a bag
container of some kind. While the writer
believed the bones to be human they were
in too small pieces to identify. However
on screening them three calcined and
blackened human teeth were found which
definitely identified it as a cremated human
burial. No artifacts of any kind were
found. Only a few mussel shells were
found just above the horizontal stone. The
limestones composing the grave were not
calcined, reddened, nor blackened and
there was no evidence whatever that the
cremation had been done there.
The deep covering of wind blown soil
and the deposition of caliche between the
stones would seem to indicate that the
grave had been there a very long time. All
of the mound has not yet been excavated
and it is possible that other parts may
contain more cremated cist burials.
Stone Grave Near Oval Mortar Holes
A week end trip was made recently to
a place ninety miles west of Abilene for
the purpose of making a further
examination of the bedrock oval mortar
hole groupings previously found along the
Colorado River and its branches west of
Colorado, Texas.

PLATE 14
No. 33. Left Side Colorado, Texas, Skull.
No. 34. Right Side of Same.
No. 35. Muzzle of Flexed Skeleton Found Near Abilene.
No. 36. In Lower Center, Lower Jaw of Colorado Skull;
Upper Right, Grinding Surfaces of Jaws Shown in
Number 35.

A visit was made while there to the
home of Mr. Will Berry to see his
collection of flint artifacts. Mr. Berry then
conducted the writer to an extensive series
of oval mortar holes on the banks of the
Colorado River a few miles northwest of
his home. Mr. Berry inquired as to the

46

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

external appearance of the stone graves. When the
writer informed him that usually little showed on the
soil surface and that the best clue was the arrangement
of the stones, he then stated that he knew of one such
place.

to back. The space for the first molar and the extra
tooth on the same side measured eleven-sixteenths
of an inch from front to back. So here we have an
extra molar-premolar on each side. The
measurement from the back end of the third molar
tooth to the center between the middle incisors on
This proved to be a typical soil covered stone
each side is two and three-eights inches. The
grave. It was situated in the soil above a sandstone
architecture of the lower jaw is heavy. The
bluff on the top ledge of which were many old oval
measurement from the bottom of the sigmoid notch
mortar holes. A covered camp site’s debris was eroding
to the bottom of the ascending ramus is two and
out of the soil edge where it was gullied a few feet
one-eighth inches. The measurement across from
below the grave. Stones two feet in length were set in
the coronoid process to the condyle at the greatest
an oval ring around the edge of a hole cut about six
breadth is slightly over two and one-sixteenth inches.
inches deep into the sandstone bedrock. The flexed
The measurement across the widest part of the jaw
body had been placed in the rock excavation with the
from the outside of the right condyle to the outside
head to the south and facing west towards the brink of
edge of the left is five inches. The ascending rami at
the River Bluff on top of which it lay. A large flat rock
the level of the third molars measure one and a half
had been laid on the body horizontally and then long
inches across. The dental arch is broad and wide
flat rocks were thickly set vertically to fill the space
spreading.
inside the oval ring, their ends resting on top of the
horizontally laid rock which covered the flexed body.
The outside of the jaw supports a chin, but the inside
The grave was between two and a half and three feet of the symphyseal region is nearly vertical; mental
deep and all but six inches was in soil. No artifact of spines are present and a shallow flat depression exists
any kind was found in the grave. The bones appear to above them. The ascending rami have an unusually
have all of the peculiar features seen in the skeletons short broad appearance and the sigmoid notches are
of stone slab graves found in the Abilene region and shallow.
for seventy-five miles east of Abilene.
This lower jaw has a peculiarity not previously seen
The upper jaw is incomplete and the number of except in portions of three petrified lower jaws found
teeth in it cannot be determined. There is a complete by George C. Martin of Rockport.
tooth however imbedded in the middle of the roof of
Normally, there is a prominent ridge immediately
the palate. This was only revealed by an accidental
below the molar teeth on the inside of the jaw. This
break in handling it. The lower jaw is nearly entire. On
ridge gives attachment to the tongue muscles used in
the right side the third and second molars are in place.
speech; and in exceedingly old human types and
A space larger than that occupied by either of the other
prototypes this ridge is very poorly developed. The
molars is vacant where the first molar should be. Where
inner sides of the fossil jaws sent by Mr. Martin are
the second premolar should be there is a tooth, longer
almost flat. The lower jaw found by the writer and
in tongue to cheek diameter than otherwise, which
described above has better developed ridges than the
seems to be intermediate in size between the molars
Rockport fossil jaws but is far more flattened inside
and premolars. Beyond this are two premolars, one
than the usual human jaws found.
canine, and two incisors. On the other side all of the
teeth are in place except the first and second molars
The skull as a whole is exceedingly narrow and
and the extra tooth. The space on each side from the long and it has the peculiar bun like posterior projection
back ends of the third molars to the back ends of the of the occipital region seen in some ancient European
second premolars measures one and seven-sixteenths and in Australian skull. Mr. E. B. Sayles’ measurement
inches.
gave it a cephalic index of 68. If this skull also had
eighteen teeth in the upper jaw, to fit the eighteen below,
On the right side the third and second molars
then we have a condition affording much material for
together measured six eighths of an inch from front

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

47

speculation. None of the lower jaw teeth seem to Superimposed on this and buried but a few inches
be crowded or irregularly placed and all had plenty deep on its northern margins is a more recent blue
unpatinated flint occupation level. Here small bird
of room.
points, fine drills, thin brown pottery sherds,
abundant blue flint keel backed scrapers and flint
Another Flexed Burial
knives were found. Three large shell beads were
In western Taylor County is a small creek branch
also found.
which is dry except for a very short period after rains.
In an eroded gulley washed in the margin of the
Several miles from its source its channel goes between
two low hills which approach rather closely on either older occupied area a flexed skeleton was exposed
side. There is a large flat basin area above these hills. this year. Its head lay to the south and it faced west.
If this small gap were closed lake would form. In fact Its hands lay on each side of the face and the knees
it is probable that this may have once been a lake as were bent and the thighs flexed on the body. There
both hills are covered with a large camp site extending were no stones over it, nor were any artifacts found
over many acres. The burnt limestone fragments and with the burial. Cattle had stepped into, and ground
flint debris go into the soil and are exposed in a thick half of the skull to pieces before discovery. The other
stratum on the edges, but are covered up rather deeply half and the lower and upper jaws were protected by
on top. At the present time there are some small water a soil covering and were restored. This skull had a
holes only a few feet deep which retain flood water very marked forward projection of the muzzle. The
for two or three weeks after rains. These however canines and incisors of the lower jaw project as far
would not support nor explain the presence of such a forward as the chin does below them. The molars and
canines are unusually large. The upper canines are
large and evidently permanent camp site.
especially large and are slightly less than one and a
The deeply buried artifacts have a heavy white coat
half inches long. All of the thirty-two teeth are whole
of patina and are of large crude workmanship. This
and in place.
level seems to have been occupied a long time and
it contained few scrapers and no pottery.

48

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

MUSEUM NEWS AND FIELD NOTES
One of the Society’s major objectives is the
building and proper maintenance of Museums in
Texas.

sites, shells and shards, copies of pictographs, and
photographs of all sorts of anthropological sites,
situations and materials.

The scientific specimens found in Texas should
be housed within the State so that the people can
see them without traveling to distant regions.

The anthropological collections would easily and
completely fill one floor of a large building.

In furtherance of this idea and in support of those
worthy institutions which are attempting to fill this need,
we are publishing short notices in the Bulletin, from
several Texas Museums, describing some of their
exhibits. Next year we hope to publish similar reports
from the other Texas Museums.
MUSEUM COLLECTIONS AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AUSTIN, TEXAS
The University possesses at present enough high
grade natural history materials to fill one large building
after the manner of the Museums Building at the
University of Michigan. The materials cannot now serve
the general public as they should and will not do so
until they are housed and displayed in a building
constructed for museum purposes.
The history collections of the University comprising
coins, medals, original documents and manuscripts,
copies of codices and rare books, antique vases and
other objects, if gathered from the Library, safes and
vaults, might well occupy one floor of a museum
building.
There are enough paleontological and archeological
materials to occupy another floor and enough
botanical, forestry and zoological materials to
completely occupy a third floor.
The anthropological collections now on hand would
more than fill our new museum room in Waggoner Hall,
which is 65xl00 feet, if only we had money to buy
cases. We have besides much material of high scientific
value not suitable for display purposes that should be
classified and stored in a permanent way for the study
of archeologists in the years to come. Among these
are skeletal materials of man, bones of animals eaten
and other materials from kitchen middens and camp

The museum materials of the Anthropological
Department may be briefly listed as follows:
1. Between 2000 and 2500 specimens of Indian
pottery from East Texas. Many specimens are in
process of reconstruction and until that work is finished
the exact number cannot be known.
2. Some 500 specimens of Neolithic stone
implements (weapons and tools) from the Scandinavian
countries of Europe (S. W. Swenson Collection),
representing the Stone Age life of North Europe before
our ancestors of the white race had learned to work
metals.
3. Probably 20,000 specimens of flint weapons and
tools from the kitchen middens, camp sites, and burial
places of the American Indians. Most of these have
been obtained in the archeological explorations of the
Department of Anthropology in recent years and come
from regions within 100 miles of Austin. They include
practically every known type of stone tool and weapon.
4. Many small donations and purchases such as:
(1) The Carr Collection of Navaho ethnological
materials representing basketry, pottery,
throwing sticks, ceremonial objects, etc., of the
Navaho tribes.
(2) The Richard Mannen collection of Bushmen
ethnological materials, including rattles of gourds,
horn snuff boxes, skin clothing, beads, etc.
(3) A small collection of Eskimo objects.
(4) Three or four different collections of Central
African ethnological materials including some
fine specimens of African iron spears, knives,
swords, arrow heads, etc.
5. Seventy-five life masques of Melanesians.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

49

6. Many skulls. and casts of skulls representing Missouri. The Dallas Sand Pits have yielded
the races and peoples of the world.
specimens of Smilodon, mammoth, two types of
camels, two types of horses, and a new genus and
7. A large collection of high grade Aztec pottery
species—a four-horned antelope. Several species
and other archeological materials, the donation of Mr.
of ancient bison complete this list.
George McClendon, who excavated them out of an
Aztec village site near Mexico City.
The Theological Department of Southern
Methodist University has a museum of more than
8. A collection of several thousand stone artifacts
common interest. In it are found gifts, from Dr. A. V.
representing the northeastern portions of the United
Lane, of Dallas, of ancient Babylonian tablets and
States.
other clay writings from the valley of the Euphrates.
9. Many single objects of museum value such as It contains a collection of papyrus and other objects
the mortar stones in front of the Main Building, of special interest to students of ancient languages.
ceremonial axes, Philippino weapons, etc.
This museum contains a number of idols, weapons
and musical instruments from Africa. The collection
10. About twenty casts of Mexican antique objects,
as a whole centers around the case of a mummy of
statues of gods, altar stones, etc. Originals now in the
an Egyptian princess.
Mexican National Museum, presented to the
University by the Mexican Republic.
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY MUSEUM,
ABILENE, TEXAS
GEOLOGIC MUSEUM OF SOUTHERN
The Simmons University Museum is sponsored by
METHODIST UNIVERSITY, DALLAS, TEXAS
The Round Table Club composed of the wives of the
The teaching collection consists of about 10,000
faculty of the University and is housed in the Science
specimens of rocks, minerals, ores, and fossils. The
and the Fine Arts Buildings. It consists of gift collections,
most outstanding fossil in the museum is that of the
known after their donors, and working collections in
Elasmosaurus recently collected at Cedar Hill, Dallas
Geology, Mineralogy, Biology and Indian artifacts.
County, Texas. This specimen has an excellent skull,
complete cervical vertebrae, the petrogirdle, and two
The chief collections are as follows: The James E.
paddles. The specimen is in an excellent state of Simmons Collection is composed of historical articles
preservation. A very nice specimen of Platycarpus of interest in the life of the founder and early days at
corpheus was taken from the Austin chalk of the city Simmons; The R. C. Crane Collection consists of early
of Dallas. According to Professor Hull the museum Texas documents, coins and paper money; The W. A.
has one of the largest skulls of Elephas imperator Hamlett Collection is of Palestinian articles and World
known. An almost complete skeleton of Elephas War trophies; The M. A. Jenkens Collection is also of
columbi and a skull of Elephas, species undetermined, European and Palestinian articles; A varied collection
has been loaned to the Texas Museum of Natural of Texas and Arkansas Indian artifacts is the gift of Y.
History.
P. Kuhn and Jerry Walker. Special rooms are devoted
to Colonial, Chinese, and World War exhibits.
One case in the Geological museum is given over
to a collection of early Eoliths from Great Britain,
Articles of especial interest in the museum are a
donated by Gilbert Floyd, a British writer of note. track of a dinosaur, a meteorite weighing over 100
Most of these are from the North Downs of Kent and pounds, rare fossil cycads, several Indian skeletons of
from the Norfolk Broads country. In this collection primitive type, collections of types of gypsum deposits,
also there are two bronze implements from Normandy. petrified woods, geodes, stalactites, calcites (including
Professor J. F. Smith has donated to the museum an a curved face spar). It also contains typical fossils of
interesting collection of minerals, among which are a West Texas formations including several elephant bones
near perfect quartz crystal weighing 100 pounds and and teeth; and also a complete lower jaw with teeth, in
some unusual specimens of galena from Joplin, place, of a fossil baby elephant.

50

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

THE HALL OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN,
WITTE MEMORIAL MUSEUM,
SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS

skins for clothing and tepees; rubbing stones for
smoothing the finished skins; awls and drills; crude
stone hoes; mortars, manos, and pestles used for
grinding, and colorful blankets of the Navajos and
Cheyennes.

This article is intended to give a survey of the
material to be found on exhibition in the Hall of the
American Indian. These exhibits show the amount of
OUTSTANDING COLLECTIONS
material which can be obtained in a short period of
Woolford-Martin Big Bend Collection. Of special
time when proper housing and exhibition space is made
available. The Witte Museum is now nearing its sixth interest to the archeologist is the collection of artifacts
made in the Big Bend District in Western Texas and
birthday.
said to belong to the Basket Maker Period. In this
This hall contains exhibits of Indian art from Alaska collection are fragments of the Atl-atl, which were used
to Mexico, particularly those of the Southwest. The by the Basket Makers before the invention of the bow
exhibits are grouped as follows:
and arrow, game stones, arrow-points made of flint
Basketry, 135 pieces, representing the work of the and semi-precious stones, basketry, nets and cord, a
Apaches, Jicarillo, Pima, Pomo, Yurok, Modoc, snail necklace and other ornaments, fiber sandals,
Maidu, Makah, Tulare, Skokomish, Choctaw, Haida hammerstones, and baskets containing burials.
and Eskimo. The collection consists largely of large Prominent in this exhibit is the reproduction of a
storage baskets, trays, carrying baskets, water bottles, petroglyph selected from a group of eighteen huge
basalt rocks containing similar picture writing. Equally
and bowl-shaped and jar-shaped baskets.
significant are mortars varying from sizes that were
Pottery, of the Hopi-Zuni, Acoma, and Mimbres easily transported when tribes migrated, to those
Indians; and an effigy bowl found at Kickapoo Springs weighing up to six hundred and fifty pounds; and
in Eastern Texas.
metates and rubbing stones made of various types of
Wearing Apparel, of the Sioux, Apache, Cheyenne, rocks.
and Oklahomas, is attractive both for the originality in
the use of raw material and the designs worked out by
the various tribes. The collection is especially rich in
beaded moccasins, boots, and buckskin clothing; and
ornamented necklaces, knife case8~ and bags.

Emma Gutzeit Pictograph Collection. This
collection consists of 121 copies in color of pictographs
and petroglyphs located principally in rock shelters in
the Big Bend region of Texas, and made under the
direction of Miss Gutzeit in the summer of 1931.

Ceremonial Objects, while limited in number, show
many types of ceremonial use: Obsidian spears; small
arrow-points made of precious stones and of delicate
workmanship; rattles and musical instruments; and
Hopi Katchinas.

The George C. Martin Coastal Collection
contains the basic material used by the donor of the
collection, George C. Martin of Rockport, in his
research reports on the Karankawa Indians. Included
in the collection are arrow-heads, bird points, stone
knives and scrapers, bone and stone drills,
“turtlebacks”, shell pendants, a piece of rolled sheetcopper, carved bone, a “boat stone” which is supposed
to have been used on an atl-atl or throwing stick, and
three carved stone fetishes.

Articles of Warfare. Bows and arrows collected
after battles with white settlers, stone arrow points
picked up generally, spear-heads, tomahawks, war
bonnets and shields of the Sioux and Cheyennes, war
clubs both plain and highly decorated, saddle bags,
and knife cases.

The Theodore Friedrich Flint Artifacts
Implements of the Chase and Household Collection, was obtained through field work and
Articles, are equally represented. Most important are purchase, and represents many of the known Indian
stone hand axes for splitting bone to get the marrow; campsites in Texas.
flint knives, scrapers and fleshers for preparing

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
The Alaskan Indian Collection has many small
articles showing the skill of the Eskimo in carving, and
his resourcefulness in securing food and clothing.
In the exhibit are a twenty-foot totem pole displayed
at the entrance of the Museum, several smaller totem
poles, models of the kayak and bidarka, snow shoes,
and dog sleds; buttons, labrets, and animal toys carved
of walrus ivory; a whale oil lamp; dancing wands and
masks made of drift wood; spears used in securing
the seal; bear-baits; shell money and Hudson Bay
Trading Beads; ladles and spoons made of the horn of
the Rocky Mountain Sheep; witch rattle baskets;
basketry cooking vessels; and other articles showing
the life of a now vanishing race.
THE MUSEUM OF THE WEST TEXAS
HISTORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY,
ALPINE, TEXAS
Shortly after the establishment of the Sul Ross State
Teachers College in 1920, several faculty members
became interested in the possibilities of a centrally
located museum in the Big Bend of Texas which would
be instrumental in collecting and preserving all
procurable specimens of anthropological, biological
and paleontological value, and to collect all information
possible bearing on the history and folk-lore of the
Southwest. With the aid of interested citizens of West
Texas, a society was organized and incorporated in
1925 for the purpose mentioned above and to promote
research in the above mentioned fields. College
authorities have materially aided the progress of the
museum by providing 1600 square feet of floor area
for display and work rooms. Twenty-two glass cases
contain the collections herein described as well as other
valuable specimens too numerous to mention in a short
article of this nature.

51

2. The Williams Indian Shield. Loaned by R. C.
Williams, Ft. Davis. This shield was taken from
the body of an Indian killed in battle by Col. R. V.
Cook. It is built upon a base of quills, covered with
tough rawhide, and finished with soft deer skin upon
which are a number of decorations and symbolic
drawings.
3. The Townsend Collection of Weapons. This
group is a portion of the famous E. E. Townsend
collection of unusual and interesting weapons. Two
old flintlocks, one having had a barrel 3 1-2 inches in
diameter, and several weapons of Spanish origin are
the most interesting of this group. An old Spanish sword
with the inscription, “For my God and my King,” is of
unusual value.
4. The V. J. Smith Collection of Historical and
Anthropological Materials. A lead sun dial, a powder
horn, and an old compass, all used in the early colonies,
are the most valuable of the historical group. Several
hundred Indian specimens represent fairly well the old
cave culture of the Big Bend as well as the open camp
artifacts. The assistance of Joe Ben Wheat and other
friends made possible the Bat Cave display which
occupies an entire case.
5. The McNutt Indian Collection. This includes
105 specimens from the eastern section of the Big Bend
and represents a culture more closely akin to Basket
Maker than any other materials on display. Baskets,
cordage, mesh bags, skeletal remains, throwing (rabbit)
sticks, and an atl-atl shaft (with fore shaft and typical
point) comprises some of the interesting parts of this
display.

6. The Pottery Display. This case includes
specimens from South America, Arizona, New
Mexico, the El Paso area, and a few sherds found in
The outstanding specimens or groups of specimens, the Alpine neighborhood.
included in the exhibits are as follows:
7. The Fletcher Green Valley Collection. This is
1. The Susan M. Janes Collection. This is a a case representing minerals and fossils collected in
general collection contained in four cases, the most Green Valley, Brewster County, by Henry T. Fletcher.
important part of which is the famous Mt. Livermore It is of interest to geologists because it is completely
collection of arrowheads, a group of 1250 flint points, representative of that interesting area south of Alpine.
many of them skillfully and beautifully wrought, all of
8. The Caldwell Collection. This is a group of
which were taken from a cache under a cairn of rocks
specimens loaned by W. E. Caldwell, Alpine.
on the tip of Mt. Livermore, the highest peak of the
Important among the historical items is an old
Davis Mountains.

52

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

cocked hat. Among the several
interesting Indian specimens is a
hafted flint hatchet, the handle
being a 2-inch sotol stalk.
9. The Book Collection.
Notable among the books in the
Museum is a Bible loaned by
President H. W. Morelock. Under
“Births” the date “1713” is easily
legible. Other books of value
include an assortment of old
textbooks; architecture of the
Civil War period; religious
publications of the ’70s; a Bible
owned by W. D. Bloys, founder
of the Bloys’ Camp Meeting; a
book presented to G. W. Baines,
Sr., by President Sam Houston;
and a treatise on Pioneer Homes
containing instructions for
building a log cabin. Among the
historical documents is a letter in
the handwriting of President
Houston to his friend G. W.
Baines.

Mr. W. J. Van London of
Amarillo has found a site in that
region which contained numerous
exceedingly small, beautiful, bird
points and a Folsom point of
somewhat larger size than those
of the type station. However it has
the same beautiful workmanship
characterized by straight chipped
edges and channeled centers.
Two of this type have been found
in the Abilene section also,
besides many of the larger
generalized type of channeled
points.
FIGURINE FROM A GRAVEL
PIT OF DALLAS, TEXAS
In the spring of 1930 Miss Ada
Hays of Dallas, Texas, brought to
Professor H. M. Law a well
carved head of a small figurine
which she reported had been
found in a load of gravel dumped
in her yard. The identity of the
gravel pit from which the head
came is unknown.

PLATE 15
No. 37. Profile View of
Carved Image from
Dallas Gravel Pit.
No. 38. Front View of Image.

Other items of interest to visitors is the collection
of mounted animals; huge fossil bones of prehistoric
mammoths; world war weapons; and photographs
of historical interest
The museum is open to visitors at posted hours
and at other times by arrangement. Contributions
by loan or gift are gratefully accepted and a
catalogue file of all materials is available to
students or research workers. Inquiries are invited
and the resources of the society are at the disposal
of all who may be interested.
Mr. Floyd V. Studer reports the finding of many
more interesting sites in the Amarillo region.

The head, is carved from a hard cemented
volcanic ash. The lips are distinctly negroid, thick,
and outcurving, but pushed forward from high cheek
bones. The nose is beaked and Aztec in character.
The forehead is flat and receding. From the front
the impression is Mayan; from the profile, Aztec.
The head shows little water action and it seems
improbable that it had been carried far in the stream
gravel; more likely, it had been dropped on the
surface by transients passing along the Trinity. —
Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University.

Mr. E. B. Sayles has been employed by “The
Mr. E. B. Howard of the University of
Medallion” of Globe, Arizona, since January. It
Pennsylvania reports the finding of much additional
seems that Mr. Sayles is making a general State
material of interest during this season’s excavations.
survey and collection of type specimens for that
Mr. Howard spent several days examining sites near
Institution.
Abilene on his way out and a similar period with
Mr. Studer at Amarillo on his return trip.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

53

SECRETARY AND TREASURER REPORT
Statement for the Period From January 13, 1932, to
September 15, 1932
RECEIPTS:
Balance from previous Secretary ................................................................................... $9.95
Subscriptions from Institutions ....................................................................................... 56.40
Refund from deposit in Abilene State Bank .................................................................... 11.59
77 Memberships @ $3.00 .......................................................................................... 231.00
$308.94
DISBURSEMENTS:
Stamps and Mailing expense ........................................................................................... 7.79
Feb. 15, Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., 1931 Bulletin .............................................. 20.00
March 19, Abilene Printing & Stationery Co.,1931 Bulletin............................................ 29.50
March 19, West Texas Engraving Company, 1931 Bulletin ............................................ 30.00
September 8, Pender Company, Stationery ..................................................................... 9.25

ACCOUNTS PAYABLE:
June 24, Worth Engraving Company, 1932 Bulletin ........................................................ 34.66
August 12, Worth Engraving Company,1932 Bulletin ..................................................... 26.11
300 Copies 1932 Bulletin in Process of Manufacture ................................................... 180.00
$337.31
Debit Balance ............................................................................................................. $28.37

54

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

OFFICIAL LIST OF MEMBERS
HONORARY MEMBERS
.
Harold J. Cook. .................................................................................................................... Agate, Neb.
Albert J. Ingalls ................................................................................................................ New York, City
ACTIVE MEMBERS
Mrs. Eileen E. Alve. ................................................................................ 1120 Arizona St., El Paso, Texas
Dr. K. H. Aynesworth ........................................................................................................... Waco, Texas
A. E. Anderson ............................................................................................................ Brownsville, Texas
Dr. J. M. Alexander ........................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. W. B. Adamson ........................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Geo. S. Anderson .............................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
J. J. Brown .................................................................................................. Capitol Station, Austin, Texas
Prof. W. F. Bruce ................................................................................................................. Cisco, Texas
Thos. L. Blanton ................................................................................................................ Abilene, Texas
Dr. J. N. Burditt ................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
L. Carolton Bray ................................................................... 309 Dallas Nat’l. Bank Bldg., Dallas, Texas
H. J. Bass .......................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
W. P. Bounds .................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
C. M. Caldwell .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Col. M. L. Crimmins .......................................................................................... Fort Sam Houston, Texas
Price Campbell .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Stewart Cooper ........................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Judge Fred Cockrell .......................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Fred Cockrell ............................................................................................................ Abilene, Texas
M. A. Clemens .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Sam Chamberlain .............................................................................................................. Refugio, Texas
Judge Ellis Douthit ............................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. S. T. Dowda ................................................................................................................ Abilene, Texas
John B. Dunn ........................................................................................... Box 692, Corpus Christi, Texas
T. P. Davidson ................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dennis D. Doty ........................................................................................................... Garden City, Kans.
Hon. W. R. Ely ................................................................................................... Box 912, Abilene, Texas
J. B. Eubanko ............................................................................................................. Brownwood, Texas
S. C. Evans ................................................................................................ 3675 8th St., Riverside, Calif.
Henry E. Elrod ................................................................................ 316 Petroleum Bldg., Houston, Texas
H. T. Fletcher ....................................................................................................................... Alpine Texas
W. J. Fulwiler, Jr ................................................................................................................. Abilene Texas
Theo. W. Frederick ................................................................ 224 W. Commerce St., San Antonio, Texas
Dr. R. P. Glenn .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Prof. Leroy C. Glass .......................................................................................................... Tipton, Indiana
R. D. Green ....................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. L. F. Grubbs ................................................................................................................ Abilene, Texas

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

55

F. M. Hanley ............................................................................................................... Fort Worth, Texas
E. L. Harwell .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. W. C. Holden ........................................................................................ Texas Tech, Lubbock, Texas
C. A. Howard .................................................................................. 3120 Princeton Ave., Dallas, Texas
Dr. T. Wade Hedrick. ...................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Major John B. Hawley ................................................................... 411 Capps Bldg., Fort Worth, Texas
Earl Hughes ..................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Bernard Hanks ................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Edgar B. Howard ................................................................. University Museum of Penn., Philadelphia
Earl Ingerson .................................................................................. Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
S. R. Jennings .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Roland Jones ................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Henry James .................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
A. T. Jackson .................................................................................... University of Texas, Austin, Texas
C. L. Johnson ................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Percy Jones ..................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Morgan Jones, Jr. ............................................................................................................ Abilene, Texas
Frederick Kay ................................................................................... 502 Martinique St., Dallas, Texas
Ed E. King ....................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
W. R. Keeble ................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
W. E. Kauffman ............................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Joe Kerr ...................................................................................................................... Sanderson, Texas
W. J. Van London ............................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
F. R. Luhn .............................................................................................................. Colorado City, Texas
E. M. Landers .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Geo. C. Martin .............................................................................................................. Rockport, Texas
Mrs. Annie Moran .................................................................................................... Weatherford, Texas
Mrs. Mildred Pickle Mayball............................................................. 3123 Hemphill Pl., Austin, Texas
Dr. R. A. Maddox ............................................................................................................ Abilene, Texas
J. F. Morrison .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Sarah Morrison ..................................................................................... Box 1058, Abilene, Texas
L. K. Mower......................................................................................... 5356 Willis Ave., Dallas, Texas
M. C. Nichols ........................................................................ 411-15-17 Capps Bldg., Ft. Worth, Texas
Bruce E. Oliver ............................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. L. K. Ory .......................................................................................... State Hospital, Abilene, Texas
Dr Julius Olsen ............................................................................................ 1204 Vogal, Abilene, Texas
H. A. Pender .................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. L. J. Pickard .............................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. J. E. Pearce ................................................................................ University of Texas, Austin, Texas
Lindsey Payton ................................................................................................................ Abilene, Texas
George L. Paxton ............................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
George L. Paxton, Jr. ....................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Frank C. Patton ............................................................................. Rosenberg Library, Galveston, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray ............................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. R. N. Richardson ....................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
W. A. Riney ..................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
J. M. Radford .................................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas

56

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Dr. W. V. Ramsey ............................................................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Mrs. O. W. Rogers.......................................................................................................... Barstow, Texas
E. B. Sayles ..................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Hattie Sayles ........................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Russell S. Stephens ......................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Victor J. Smith ................................................................................................... Sul Ross, Alpine, Texas
Mrs. G. B. Smedley .................................................................................................... Fort Worth, Texas
Paul L. Summers ............................................................................................................ Sagerton, Texas
Floyd V. Studer ............................................................................. 635 Amarillo Bldg., Amarillo, Texas
Dr. Grady Shytles ............................................................................................................Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Maud Durlin ..................................................................... Sullivan Public Library, El Paso, Texas
Ellis W. Shuler ....................................................................... Southern Methodi6t Univ., Dallas, Texas
Robert J. Usher ........................................................................................................... New Orleans, La.
A. H. Witte .................................................................................................................... Henrietta, Texas
Prof. A. Williams ...................................................................................................................................
C. W. Wilson ..................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
H. O. Wooten ................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
J. M. Wagstaff ................................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Lester B. Wood ......................................................................................... Box KK, Breckenridge, Texas
Ernest W. Wilson ............................................................................................................... Abilene, Texas
S. W. Wolford ............................................................................ 112 Cloverleaf Ave., San Antonio, Texas

