BULLETIN
OF THE

VOLUMES 19&20
1948-49

ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCII~TY
2009
~PRJNT EDITION

BULLETIN
OF THE

~exa~ Ar~haeo~og~a~ an~
~a~eou~o~og~a~ ~o~e~y
VOLUMES 19-20
1948-49

TI~

~

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY
2009
REPRINT EDITION

Reprinted with permission ofThe Texas Archeological Society, Austin,
Texas by Gustav’s Library, Davenport, Iowa, 2009. This reprint made
from an original edition provided by The Texas Areheological Society.

www.gustavslibrary.com
1011 E High St, Davenport, IA 52803

BULLETIN
OF THE

~aleou~ological

Volume Ninef~¢n
1948

Published
h!! the
Lubbock,
Texas

COPYRIGHT 1941~ ~Y

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

BULLETIN
of the

i exa Arrheologieal anll
laleoulologiral orlely
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains
Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits.
By T. N. Campbell .......................................................

7-35

Camp Sites in Coke County.
By Dr. Cyrus N. Ray ...................................................

36-57

Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir:
A Preliminary Report.
By Robert L. Stephenson ........................................

58-73

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern
Coahuila.
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr .............................................

74-87

Vertebrate Paleontological Field Technique and
Its Application to Archaeological Collecting.
By Wann Langston. Jr .............................................

88-99

Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus.
By Clarence H. Webb .................................................... 100-147
Recent Archaeological Research in Oklahoma.
By Robert E. Bell .............................................................. 148-154
Importance o£ The "Gilmore Corridor" in Culture
Contacts Between Middle America and the
Eastern United States.
By Alex D. Krieger ....................................................... 155-178
9. News Notes and Editorials ......................................... 179-187
10..Report of the Secretary-Treasurer...........................

188

11. Membership List ............................................................ 189-192
Vol. 19, 1948.

Price $3.00

Lubbock, Texas

OFFICERS

M. L. CRIMMX~S, San Antonio, President
CYRUS

N. RAY,

Abilene, President Emeritus

VICTOR J. SMITH,

A]pine, Active Vice-President

ERNEST WALLACE, Lubbock, Secretary-Treasurer
W. Co

I-IOLDEN,

Lubbock, Editor of Publications

DIRECTORS
In Addition to the Above
Alex Krieger, Austin

Rupert N. Richardson, Abilene

Joe Ben Wheat, Tucson, Arizona

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
Tom N. Campbell, Austin

Floyd V. Studer, Amarillo

Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, Dallas

Frank Watt, Waco

Mrs. Glen E. Moore, E1 Paso

Otto O. Watts, Abilene

Erik K. Reed, Santa Fe

C. H. Webb, Shreveport

TRUSTEES
Robert E. Bell, Norman, Okla.

E. H. Sellards, Austin

Frank Grimes, Abilene

E. W. Shuler, Dallas

R. K. Harris, Dallas
J. Charles Kelley, Austin

O. L. Sims, San Angelo
W. C. Watts, Lubbock

orewori
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking; for the study of the
history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas;
for the encouragement of the proper
collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums and their
study and classification and the publication of the results of the researches
incident thereto.
The BULLETIN is published annually
for distribution to members of the society. Opinions expressed herein are
.those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent views of the society or
the editorial staff.
The cost of publication of this issue
has been supplemented w~ith funds from
Texas Tech Museum.

THE MERRELL SITE:
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REMAINS ASSOCIATED
WITH ALLUVIAL TERRACE DEPOSITS
IN CENTRAL TEXAS
T. N. CAI’~IPBELL
Introduction
This brief report is placed on record because the Merrell
site has attracted attention, chiefly through preliminary
notices,2 in connection with the problem of early man in
America,3 and also because it shows both natural and cultural stratigraphy--a situation not too commonly reported
in the archeology of central Texas. Although the evidence
as outlined in this paper does not support any claims of
special antiquity, the stratigraphic data furnished by the
MerrelI site have a direct bearing on the interpretation of
prehistoric cultural developments in the central Texas area.
The Merrell site~ consists of midden materials included in
alluvial terrace deposits on the north side of Brushy Creek,
one quarter mile northeast of the town of Round Rock, Williamson County, Texas. This locality is 18 miles north of
Austin. Brushy Creek is a small spring-fed stream which
heads.in the low hills of the eroded Balcones Escarpment~
just west of Round Rock and flows in a northeasterly direction, its water eventually reaching the Brazos River in Milam
County by way of the San Gabriel and Little Rivers.
Prior to excavation by archeologists, the Brushy Creek
terrace deposits were commercially excavated for gravel
over a period of years, and it was because of these operations
that the site was discovered in 1934 by A. M. Wilson of Austin.
1 This article in the revised ~nd expanded version

of a paper ~rc~ented

before

the Texas Arch~logi~l and PathOlogical ~ciety at i~ ~elfth Annu~ Mee~ng
in Abilene, Oc~b~ 26, 1940.
2 Anonymo~, 1935~d.
3 B~an, 1935, p. 7, 1936b, p. 1363 ; Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, 1940, p, 133 ;
~fgh~n 1936, p. vii ; Mason, 1936, p. 56 ; Sell~ds, 1936, 1940, p. 404.
4 The si~ ts nam~ for J. ~ Merrell, lando~er at the time of ~vation
by the Unlv~i~ of Tex~
5 The B~n~ ~meni ~o~s the eas~ and ~u~ern bm~nda~, of the
Edwards Pla~au.

Texas ArcheoIo.q~cal and Paleontological Society

Wilson reported the site to the late J. E. Pearce of the University of Texas, who made arrangements for excavation by
the University. The field work was directed by Jack To
Laughlin, an anthropology student, under the personal .supervision of Pearce. Since student labor was used,6 excavation was confined to week-ends. This work began on
October 18, 1934, and ended on January 13, 1935. Additional
testing, with results largely of a negative nature, was done
in June, 1940, by J. Charles Kelley with a small crew of
laborers supplied by the Works Progress Administration.
Pearce was impressed by the fact that flint artifacts and
flakes were exposed in a vertical bank of the terrace at
depths ranging from the surface to eighteen feet below, and
he believed that the site might throw light on the problem of
the antiquity of man in America. Since the problem was
essentially a geological problem, Pearce persuaded Dr. E. H.
Sellards, Director of the Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas, to study the geology of the Merrell locality.
The results of their joint activities were summarized and
issued through Science Service in January and Februa.ry,
1935.7
Geology of the Site~
The alluvial deposits of Brushy Creek rest on Cretaceous
limestones and shales. The hills on either side of the stream
(Plate 1, A) are of Buda limestone. Immediately below the
Buda limestone in the Merrell locality lies the Del Rio clay
formation, and it is upon this shale formation that the
Brushy Creek alluvial deposits rest. The Georgetown limestone, a formation which normally underlies the Del Rio
clay, appears west of a fault that crosses Brushy Creek just
below the dam shown in Plate 1, A. The fault trends northeast and is downthrown to the southeast, bringing the
Georgetown limestone and the Del Rio clay into vertical

6 This labor was provided by the Federal Emergenc~, Relief Administrution.
7 The four notices, given in footnote 2 above, were all derived from the original
report submitted to Science Service.
8 The geologlcal aspects of the Merrell slte have been discussed by Sel]ar~ls
(1936).
Plate 1, A, and the details given in thls section are drawn from his
report.
Inasmuch as Setlards gives views of the locality where excavation took
place (his Fig. 2 and Fig. 3), similar illustrations are omltt¢~l from this paper.

The Merrell Site

contact in the stream bed. A part of the Balcones fault
system, this local fault has caused the formation of springs
in the stream bed and thus provides a locally abundant water
supply.
The terraces are easily recognized in Brushy Creek valley
(Plate 1, A). The lower and younger terrace covers the
southern half of the valley. It lies 10 to 13 feet above the
pres~iat stream level and is covered during flood stage. The
second and older terrace covers the northern half of the
valley and is approximately twice the height of the lower
terrace, rising to 20 or 25 feet above stream level. The deposits of this older terrace extend across the fault described
above. A large part of this terrace has been removed for
gravel, leaving a peninsula of terrace deposits in whose
vertical south bank artifacts and midden materials were
observed by Wilson. This peninsula is some 400 feet from
the stream and at the present time is being removed for its
gravel content.
Stratigraphy
The strata of the second terrace, observable for several
hundred yards downstream, are fairly uniform. At the
s~erie of archeological excavation the strata are easily distinguished, and the two localities where digging took place
(see Plate 1, A, Localities 1 and 2) can be correlated.
A complete cross section was obtained at Locality 1, where
the strata appear as follows:
Approximate
thickness
in feet
Burnt rock midden ..................................................... 3/4
Heavy rock and gravel, hearth at base ..................... 6
Silt, some gravel ............................................................ 7
Clean, stream-laid gravel ............................................ 4
Det Rio clay (bedrock)
Essentially the same sequence appears at Locality 2, except that here a complete section was not obtained. Excavation was carried down only to the top of the silt stratum; the

10

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

deposit below was obscured by talus materials.
at Locality 2 is given below:

The column

Approximate
thickness
in feet
Burnt rock midden
2
Gravel, some silt .......................................................... 4½
Burnt rock midden ....................................................... 2
Silt (penetrated to depth of 2 feet)
A correlation of these two localities is not difficult (Plate
1, B). The sequences are almost identical and only 60 feet
separates the two columns. The upper layers can be traced
from one locality to the other. An additional element at
Locality 2, the lower burnt rock midden, seems to correlate
with the hearth at the top of the silt layer at Locality 1.
Excavation

Excavation at the Merrell site was conducted in the two
localities referred to above. These are situated on the
southern edge of the older terrace remnant. Much less
excavation was done at Locality 1 than at Locality 2.
At Locality 1 a trench 14 feet wide was begun at the bas~
of the talus slope and was carried downward until bedrock
:(Del Rio clay) was reached at a depth of 18 feet below the
surface of the terrace. The trench was then carried forward
into the bank until a perpendicular face was attained. For
this reason the trench was very short, its north-south length
being approximately 5 feet. Since the bluff sloped backWard Considerably, very little material was removed from
the upper strata, most of it being from the silt and lower
gravel layers. The artifacts taken from this locality were
very meager in quantity, the series numbering only 18
specimens.
At Locality 2 excavation was more extensive.

Instead of

PLATE 1
]~Iap showing vicinity of hlerrell site.
Localities where excavation took
place may be seen at 1 and 2.
Chart illustrating correlation of Localities 1 and 2 at Merrell site.

MIDDEN

HIDDEN

GRAVEL

GRAVEL

MIDDEN

SILT

SILT

CORRELATION

OF LOCALITIES

MERRELL

GRAVEL

BEDROCK

l~]ate 1

SITE

AT

The M~rreIl Si~e

13

working inward from the face of the bluff, as at Locality 1,
excavation began at the surface and was carried downward.
At this locality a small neck of terrace deposit connected two
larger remnants (see Plate 1, A) o

At the top this neck was

10 feet in width, but since each side sloped outward toward
the base, the width of the excavated area increased to some
20 feet before work was terminated. The area excavated
was approximately 50 feet in length, bat in only One spot~ was
it carried down into the silt stratum.

Here a small test pit

penetrated the silt stratum to a depth of 2 feet, giving a
column of11 fee~t that was sampled.
from Locality 2 totaled 197.

The specimens taken

The strata and their associated artifacts will be considered
in the following sections.

Beginning at the bottom of the

terrace deposit and proceeding upward, the following designations will be used (see Plate I, B) : Lower Gravel Stratum
(no artifacts), Merrell 1 (Silt Stratum), Merrell 2 (Lower
Midden), MerrelI 3 (Upper Gravel), and Merrell 4 (Upper
Midden).
Lower Gravel Stratum
This layer was exposed at Locality 1 (see Plate 1, B),
where it appears as a 4-foot stratum of coarse gravel lying
upon Del Rio clay (bedrock). This clean gravel was evidently deposited by a c]edr running stream. According. to
the early notices, artifacts were taken from this stratum;
and the field notes refer to "crude scrapers, fist axes, and
spokeshaves." In the writer’s opinion,, none of the specimens
collected from this stratum c.an .be identified as artifacts.
Instead they appear to be ~tream-rolled flint fragments derived from flint nodules in the old stream bed. Some fragments may .be primary flakes detached by human hand, but
this is questionable. The secondary chipping on these frag¯ merits is irregular and haphazard, which is precisely what
might be expected in stream-rolled flints. Since the evidence is inconclusSve, no emphasis is here placed on the
"artifacts~’ obtained from the lower gravel stratum. This

14

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

makes it necessary to revise the earlier statements9 that
artifacts were found to depths of 18 feet below the terrace
surface. The maximum depth at which definite artifacts
were found is approximately 14 feet. While this correction
has no particular significance, it is made in order to set the
record straight.
Merrell 1 (Silt Stratum)

Lying above the coarse gravel at Locality 1 is a thick layer
(7 to 71/~ feet) of light brown silt which includes small
amounts of gravel. The evidence from this layer clearly
indicates that Brushy Creek valley was occupied by man
during the period when this silt was being, deposited. One
small hearth, some 3 feet in diameter and 2 to 3 inches thick,
was noted in the lower part of the layer. This hearth was
made up of charcoal, ashes, and numerous snail shells. In
addition, snail shells, bits of charcoal (occasionally forming
lenses), 14 artifacts, and numerous flint flakes were distributed throughout the block of silt excavated.
Representative artifacts~o from the silt stratum at Locality
1 are shown in Plate 2, A. Only one projectile point came
from this layer (Plate 2, A, 1) ; this form persisted through
the various layers above and became one of the dominant
forms in Merrell 4. Four knives, representing at least two
different types, were found. One type (Plate 2, A, 2), represented by a single basal fragment, is long and slender and
has a straight base; the other (Plate 2, A, 4), represented by
the three remaining specimens, is broadly triangular in outline and has a base which varies from straight to broadly
convex. Similar in outline to this second type of knife are
two thick, crudely made blades.11 Five side-scrapers are
made from flakes that are retouched along one edge, some9 Anonymous, 19~Sa-d.
I0 Mo~t of the artifacts from the Merrell site are made of flint.
In the
artifact descriptions which follow, it is to be understood that flint is the material
used unless some other material is specifically mentioned. Flint is very abundant
in central Texas, occurring as lenses or nodules in certain limestone formations
of the Edwards Plateau. and it has been widely distributed in pebble form by
the streams which £1ow southeastward from this plateau. The central Texas flint
is usually gray in color, ranging from very light gray to black, and mue.h of it
i~ of high quality.
11 The thinner, well-chipped specimens are designated ~s knives; the thicker°
heavier, more crudely fashioned ones are called blades.

The Merrell Site

15

times along two parallel edges (Plate 2, A, 5), and there is
one very crude end-scraper. One graver appears in this
series (Plate 2, A, 3); it is made from a small but rather
thick flake and has two beak-like points on one edge. Between the two points is a steeply retouched concavity.
At Locality 2 only four artifacts were obtained from the
silt stratum. These include a projectile point, a gouge, a
handstone fragment, and a heavy blade fragment. The
projectile point is similar to the point illustrated in Plate 3,
A, 8. The gouge belongs to the type that has been described
as the Clear Fork planer-gouge.,~ It is piano-convex in cross
section, only the convex face exhibiting flake scars, and it is
similar in outline to the gouge illustrated in Plate 3, B, 3,
from Merrell 3. The handstone fragment is made of granite
and shows flat grinding facets on both surfaces; its original
outline cannot be determined. Because of its fragmentary
nature, little can be said about the blade.
Merrell 2 (Lower Midden)
This layer is represented .only at Locality 2, where it
consists of some 2 feet of burnt rock midden deposit resting
on the silt stratum. The densely packed hearthstone fragments (burnt rock) in this layer may be seen in Plate 2, B, 1
(between feet and knees of man). The soil filling the interstices between the stones is not so dark in color as that in
the upper .midden, probably because of a greater amount of
leaching.
The artifacts from the lower midden are few in number:,
three projectile points, a thick oval blade, and two sidescrapers. The two forms of projectile points represented are
shown in Plate 2, B. The form shown at 3 is represented by
two specimens, that shown at 2 by one specimen. The latter
may well be a drill fashioned from a discarded projectile
point.
At Locality 1 the hearth lying between the silt stratum
and the upper gravel has been correlated with the lower

12 ]Ray,

1938, p.

198 and Plate 24, Fig.

2.

16

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

midden at Locality 2.

This hearth, composed principally of

fire-cracked limestone, was about 6 inches thick and had a
diameter of approximately 2 feet. The correlation of this
hearth with the lower midden at Locality 2 is based on identical stratigraphic positions in duplicating series. No artifacts
accompanied the hearth.
Merrell 3 (Upper Gravel)
Above the silt stratum at Locality 1, and above the lower
midden at Locality 2, lies a clearly marked layer of gravel
(see Plate 2, B, 1). The uppermost part of this layer contains
numerous limestone slabs which appear to have been deposited by strong fluvial action. The remainder of the layer
at both localities consists of gravel with some silt and traces
of ash. At Locality 2, which is farther downstream, ash and
bits of charcoal were well distributed throughout the layer.
Artifacts and animal bones, chiefly deer and bison, occurred
in this layer at both localities; but because of the small
amount of excavation in the layer at Locality t only a few
artifacts were found there. It is apparent that much of the
cultural material in this layer has been washed into place.
Judging from the presence of ash, charcoal, and the number
of artifacts in the stratum at Locality 2, the source of the
cultural material could not have been very far away. This
source was not located.
From the upper gravel at Locality 1 came only four artifacts: a projectile point, two knives, and one drill. The projectile point (Plate 3, A, 10) is quite unlike any other point
"from the Merrell site. It i~ somewhat leaf-shaped, the base
is concave, and there are two additional features worthy of
special comment: oblique flake scars and ground edges near
the base. The outline, chipping, and ground edges near the
base place it within the range of the type ~ormerly desigPI.~TE 2
Artifacts from silt stratum, Locality !, Merretl site. 1, projectile point;
2. 4, knives; 3, graver; 4, sidescraper.
Vie~v at Locality 2 and artifacts from the lower midden, Locality 2,
}.~[errell site,
1, view of terrace deposit at Locality 2, showing silt
stratum, lower midden, upper gravel, and upper midden; 9-3, projectile
points from lower midden, Locality 2,

Plate 2

19

The MerreIl Site

nated as Oblique Yuma.

The two knives are quite dissim-

ilar; one is oval in outline, and the other is triangular with
a concave base. The drill (Plate 3, B, 5) has a flaring, slightly concave base.
The series of artifacts from the gravel stratum at Locality
2 is comparatively large, totaling 80 specimens, all made of
stone except one, which is of mussel shell. These are described under special headings below.
Projectile Points. Representative projectile points are illustrated in Plate 3. The series is made up of 40 points, and
it is immediately apparent that a variety of types is present.
The dominant forms are shown in Plate 3, A, 1-2, 7-9. The
forms illustrated at 1 and 2 occur eight times each; ~hose at
7 and 9 five times each. The form at 8, which is probably
related to that at 9, occurs twice. Another fairly common
type is that illustrated in Plate 3, B, 4 and 6, which has
recently been named Taylor Thinned Base.,3 Five of thes~
are present, four having alternately beveled lateral edges.
The remainder of the projectile point forms occur with
lower frequency. The square-based forms at Plate 3, B, 4
and 5, are represented by three and two examples respectively. They appear to be variations of the same type, one
having a blade that is notably broad. The projectile point
forms shown in Plate 3, A, 3 and 6, are represented by one
example each. The former (3) is probably a variant of the
Pedernales Indented Base type.’,
Knives. From Merrell 3 came 20 artifacts which are placed
in this category. They vary considerably in size, shape, and
technique of manufacture. Three forms are discernible.
Thirteen are triangular with straight or slightly convex
bases, the lateral edges showing varying degrees of convexity (Plate 3, B, 7). Five are ovokl or leaf-shaped, with
strongly convex bases (Plate 3, B, 8), and two are lanceolate,
being pointed at both ends.

13 Kelley, 1947, p. 97 and Plate X, b.
This has been referred
as Clear Fork Dart 4 (Ray, 1938, pp. 199-200 and Plate 2~5, Fig. 1).
14 Kelley,

1947,

p.

99

and

Plate

X,

c.

to

by

Ray

20

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Blades. Seven crude blades are included in this series.
These tend to be roughly oval or triangular in outline and
differ from the larger knives only in thickness and crudeness of flaking.
Scrapers. Only four scrapers are present here. Three of
these are side-scrapers made from flakes and are retouched
along one edge; the fourth is a small piano-convex endscraper (Plate 3, B, 9).
Gouges. Five gouges are associated with this stratum at
Locality 2. ,a!l are of the Clear Fork planer-gouge type,
having piano-convex cross sections (Plate 3, B, 1 and 3).
Handstones. One handstone fragment, made of conglomerate, indicates the presence of a broadly oval form of handstone, the edges shaped by pecking and both surfaces showing wear.
Pitted Stones. One object, made of granite (Plate 3, B,
10), superficially resembles a handstone, but no grinding
facets are discernible. Each flat face bears one small circular
depression or pit.
Pendants. One specimen consists of approximately half of
a freshwater mussel shell that has been perforated near the
margin, presumably for suspension.
Drills. The objectillustrated at Plate 3, B, 2, is the only
perforating tool in the series. This stemmed drill looks like
a reworked projectile point.
MerrelI 4 (Upper Midden)
At Locality 2 no excavation was done in the very thin
midden deposit at the top of the column. All of the artifacts
described below are from the upper midden at Locality 2.
This midden layer ranged from 11/z to 2 feet in thickness and
is a good example of the typical burnt rock surface midden
of central Texas.~ The matrix consists of dark, greasy soil
which includes numerous angular fragments of limestone, all
showing unmistakable evidences of having been in the fire
15

Kelley

and Campbell, 1942.

The Merrell Site

(hearthstone fragments).

21

Also included are deer and bison

bones, 107 stone artifacts, and many flint flakes.

The areal

extent of this midden could not be ascertained because commercial excavation had removed so much of the terrace
deposit. Assuming that the upper midden deposit of Localities I and 2 were at one time continuous, as seems quite
likely, it may be conjectured that the midden once had a
minimum east-west diameter of 90 feet. The midden deposit
showed no internal stratigraphic color variations. In all
probability it represents either a continuous or closely intermittent occupation over a comparatively short span of time.
Projectile Points. A total of 56 projectile points appears
in the series of artifacts from Merrell 4. The points shown in
Pla~e 4, A, 1-5, seem to be variants of one square-stemmed
type, for the only notable differences are in shoulder treatment. This is the dominant type in the upper midden. The
form at 1 occurs eight .times, that at 2 eleven times, that at 3
four times, that at 4 eight times, and that at 5 two times,.
making a total of thirty-three projectile points in this group.
The point at 6, represented by three specimens, may also be
another variant, but it differs by having a slightly flaring
stem. The point at 7 is an example of the Nolan Beveled
Stem type,16 and five examples of this type are present. The
points at 8 and 11 are variants of the Pedernales Indented
Base type; four examples of this type are present. The large,
stemmed form at !0, which may be a stemmed knife, appears
four times in the series. At 9 is a long slender point that is
unique at the site and probably represents an intrusion from
some adjacent area. Two examples of the Baird Beveled
Blade type~7 occur, and there are two points with indented
bases like that shown in Plate 3, A, 9. Two additional forms,
represented by one specimen each, are not illustrated, but
similar forms may be seen at Plate 3, A, 1 and 7.
Knives. The 17 knives from this stratum may be divided
into two groups on the basis of their outlines. Ten are tri16 Kelley, 1947, p. 99 and Plate X, d.
This is Ray’s Clear Fork Dart 2 (Ray,
1938, P. 199 and Plate 25, Fig. 1).
17 Kelley, 1947, p. 97 and Plate X, a.
Ray h~ refe~ to ~is ~ Clear Fork
Da~ 3 (~y, 1938, p. 199 and Plate 25, Fig.

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

angular, having straight bases and lateral edges that are
only slightly convex (Plate 4, B, 1). The remaining seven
are more or less ovoid and have strongly convex bases
(Plate 4, B, 2). There is considerable variation in these
knives with respect to size, thickness, and quality of chipping.
Blades. Nine chipped stone objects are classified as blades.
These are very roughly chipped by percussion flaking and
are ovoid in outline.
Picks. Two long, narrow chipped stone objects are called
picks. One has a length of 13.9 centimeters; it is triangular
in cross section, one face being flatly convex, the other rising
to a high keel. One end of this tool is pointed, but the other
is truncated.
Gouges. Three gouges occur, two being Clear Fork planergouges, but the third is quadrangular in outline and shows
chipping on both faces (Plate 4, B, 3).
Gravers. Two gravers appear in Merrell 4 and are shown
in Plate 4, B, 5 and 6. Both are made from flakes which have
been retouched on one face only. The graver shown at 5
has a definite beak-like point; that shown at 6 has a chisellike point. Both gravers have edges suitable for scraping
and cutting purposes and are evidently tools which were
used for more than one purpose.
Drills. One drill (Plate 4, B, 4) is present. This has a circular base that is well chipped on both faces; the tip of the
pointed end is missing.
Scrapers. Eight scrapers occur in the series from this
upper midden layer at Locality 2. One is an elongated flake
with three well-chipped concavities on its margins. The
remaining specimens in this category are side-scrapers that
PLATE

3

A. Projectile points from the upper gravel layer, Localities 1 and
Merrell site.
B. Artifacts from the upper gravel layer, Localities 1 and 2, ~[errel! site.
1, 3, Clear Fork planer-gouges; 2, 5, drills; 4, 6, projectile poin.ts; 7-8,
knives, end-scraper; !0, pitted stone.

Plate 3

The MerrelI Site

25.

have been fashioned from fairly large oval flakes. Most of
these have only one retouched edge (Plate 4, B, 7).
Hand Axes. Only one artifact belongs to this class (Plate
4, B, 8).

It is made from a large, rather thick primary flake,

with a portion of the margin neatly chipped to a broad,
rounded cutting edge.

The butt is formed by the striking

platform of the original primary flake.
Choppers. Five objects have been placed in this category.
In general shape they resemble the hand axe described
above, but they are very roughly finished.
Handstones. Two handstones were found, one of which is
shown in Plate 4, B, 9. This is made of rather soft sandstone;
it has been pecked into shape and both faces are quite flat
from heavy wear. The second specimen is an oval quartzite
stream-bed cobble which shows abrasion on two faces.
Pigment. A small rectangular piece of hematite contains
an oval depression on one flat surface. On this surface, both
in the depression and surrounding it, are numerous striations
indicating use as a source of pigment.
Surface Collection

From the Merrell site a total of 195 artifacts and artifact
fragments were collected from the surface. These include
essentially the same categories of artifacts that were taken
from the two excavated localities. The series consists of 36
projectile points, 65 knives, 20 blades, 3 gouges, 1 graver,
20 scrapers, 1 hand axe, 1 pick, 2 hammerstones, 4 handstones, 1 small abrading stone, and numerous reject pieces.
The projectile points number 36, but sixteen of these are
too fragmentary for purposes of classification. The forms
duplicate those obtained from the excavation. They include
one Taylor Thinned Base, two Nolan Beveled Stem, four
Pedernales Indented Base, four points similar to the points
shown in Plate 4, A, 4 and 5, two almost identical with that
shown at Plate 3, A, 2, one like that at Plate 3, A, 1, and one
similar to that at Plate 3, A, 8.

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

26

Of the 65 knives and knife fragments it is possible to
classify fourteen as triangular, five as oval, one as lanceolate,
four as stemmed (broad, square base and poorly defined
shoulders), and three as flake knives. Similar forms appear
in the 20 blades. Eight of these are triangular with a straight
base, nine are ovoid, and one is lanceolate. The remainder of
the knives and blades are too fragmentary for classification.
The gouges include one Clear Fork gouge,~ with a biconvex cross section and two Clear Fork planer-gouges. The
graver consists of a thick flake with one small beak-like
point.
The scrapers include three concave-scrapers, one very
large piano-convex end-scraper, and sixteen side-scrapers.
The hand axe is heavy, with a narrow, thick butt and a
pointed blade; the choppers have broad, roughly chipped
cutting edges. The pick is similar to those described from
Merrell 4. The hammerstones include one flint core and one
quartzite pebble, both specimens showing heavy battering.
Among the handstones, one quartzite specimen has a broadly
oval outline and pecked edges, and there are two rectanguloid quartzite pebbles showing grinding facets. All of these
handstones exhibit only one abraded face.
The single abrading stone is made from a small, thin piece
of black schist, each face showing a shallow basi~ formed
by wear.
Cultural Identi]ication o! MerrelI Site
It is clear that the artifacts from each of the strata at the
Merrell site belong to the same basic culture. The same
categories of artifacts appear in each of the layers, the most
notable differences consisting of variations in projectile
points. The trait list for the site as a whole indicates a
nomadic hunting and food-gathering people with a predominantly lithic industry. This list includes the following
general traits: stone-lined hearths, the discarded fragments
of fire-cracked stone leading to the development of burnt
18 Ray,

1938, pp. 197-198 and Plate 2,1,

Fig. 2.

The Merrell Site

27

rock middens; a variety of dart points; triangular, ovoid, and
lanceolate knives and blades; Clear Fork types of gouges;
side-, end-, and concave-scrapers; hand axes, crude choppers,
and pick-like tools; gravers and drills; handstones and grinding slabs, the latter by implication only; pitted stones; mussel shell pendants; and the use of red pigment.
The absence of certain associations places the Merrell site
in a definite horizon in the known archeology of the surrounding area. The absence of fossil mammals and demonstrably early types of projectile points,9 makes it possible to
exclude this site from the early American hunting horizon.
Likewise, the absence of pottery and arrowpoints eliminates
the possibility of placement in the late protohistoric and
historic horizon, represented by the Austin2o and Toyah2,
loci in this area, The culture represented may thus be
placed in an intermediate horizon. The traits listed above
permit its placement in the Balcones phase which Kelley22
has defined as including the archaic (pre-ceramic) cultures
of central, southern, and southwestern Texas and the adjoining portions of northeastern Mexico. Furthermore it can be
placed in the Edwards Plateau aspect23 of the Balcones
phase, but the question as to whether it can be classified as
a component of the Clear Fork, the Round Rock, or some
other unnamed focus of this aspect cannot be answered on
the basis of data available at present. Distinctive traits of
both the Clear Fork and the Round Rock loci--shown by
Kelley to be contemporaneous in the Colorado River valley
near Austin--are present in the Merrell site. For example,
in Merrell 1 one Clear Fork planer-gouge occurs; in Merrell
3 Taylor Thinned Base projectile points and Clear Fork
planer-gouges occur along with a variant of the Pedernales
19 One exception to this statement will doubtless be noted, namely the presence

of what formerly would have been called an Oblique Yuma type of l~oint in :Merre]l
3. It is difficult to explain the presence of this type at the Merrell site. A common
explanation for similar occurrences is that occasionally points from an earlier
horizon were picked up and used by later people. This could be true here, but
it is also possible that the people who left archaeological materials in Merrell 3
were contemporaneous with a group who still made "Oblique Yuma" points. A
question is raised here which cannot be settled at present~
20 Kelley, 1947, p. 103;
21 Kelley. 1947, p. 103.
22 Ibid., pp, 99, 194.

Krieger.

25 Ibid., p. 99 and Fig.

9, A.

1946.

pp.

165-168.

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Indented Base projectile rmint; and in Merrell 4 Nolan Beveled Stem points, Baird Beveled Blade points, and Clear Fork
gouges are associated with Pedernales Indented Base points.
Kelley has stated that "pure" components of Clear Fork and
Round Rock loci are rare in a large part of central Texas and
that traits of the two loci are commonly mixed in the same
site.24 The precise taxonomic position of the Merrell site
cannot be determined until a number of detailed site reports
are published from the central Texas area. For the present
it is sufficient to assign the Merrell site to the Edwards
Plateau aspect of the widespread Baicones phase of culture.
~ In view of the fact that my colleague, J. Charles Kelley, is
now making a comparative study of central Texas archeology, no attempt will be made here to discuss the relationship
of the Merrell site to other published sites of the Edwards
Plateau aspect. Excavated sites of this aspect have been
reported by Jackson2~ and Woolsey.~
Age of the Merrell Site
The preliminary notices suggest a relatively early date
for the Merrell site. They include such statements as the
following:
The recent discovery at Round Rock by Mr. Pearce
and similar discoveries elsewhere are tending to
place the time of the appearance of man on this
continent from 10,000 to 20,000 years earlier.~
It is probable that all the deposits were laid down
after the Pleistocene (Ice Age), or in early geologically Recent times .... On the other hand, they
may go back into late Pleistocene.2s

24
25
26
27
28

Ibid., p. 109.
Jackson, 1938, 1939.
Woolsey, 1938.
Anonymous, 1935a.
Anonymous, 1935b,

PLATE 4
A. Projectile points from upper midden, .Locality I, l%~[errell site.
1-2, knives; 3,
B. Artifacts from upper midden, Locality 1, Merrell site.
gouge; 4 drill; 5-6 gravers; 7, side scraper;’8, hand axe; 9, handstone.

The Merrell Site

31

The basis for this dating, according to the notices, is the
presence of archeological materials in the older of the two
terraces in Brushy Creek valley. This proves that man
was living in the valley during a period when the stream
was first filling its previously cut valley. To indicate that
this p~riod must be early, it is stated that elephant and mastodon bones have been found in Texas "in terraces of similar
position and height above stream level as this terrace at
Round Rock."~g
~
Later, in his report on the geology of the Merrell site and
its environs, Sellards~o does not claim any great age for the
upper terrace deposit. He points out that no vertebrate fossils were found and that the included snails and clams were
of no aid in determining the age of the terrace. However,
he stresses the fact that a considerable p.eriod of time is
represented by the upper terrace deposits, and he suggests
that these dePOsits reflect a set of conditions which must have
been present in other stream valleys Of Texas. The low
position of the terrace, in his view, indicates a relatively late
date, but he concludes with the statement that the age of
the deposit is undetermined.
Today the best approach to the dating of the Merrell site
is through a comparison with similar sites in the Colorado
River valley which have been reported by Jackson~ and
and Kelley.~ In the Colorado River valley just northwest
of Austin archeological materials assignable to the Edwards
Plateau aspect have been found in situ in both the 20- and
40-foot terraces. Neither terrace has yielded vertebrate fossils in association with archeological materials. These are
the two lowest terraces present in that valley, and they
occupy the same relative positions as the !0- and 20-foot terraces of Brushy Creek. On the basis of identical physiographic positions and the inclusion of archeological remains
referable to the same culture, it is suggested that the 20-foot
29 Anonymous,

1935b.

30 Sellards0 1936.
31 Jackson,

1939.

100-103.
See
~2 KelleY, 1947, pp.
section of the Colorado River valley.

Kelley

and

Campbell,

1942,

for

cross

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

terrace of Brushy Creek and the 40-foot terrace of the Colorado River are of the same age.3~
Kelley34 has presented evidence which indicates that the
Clear Fork and Round Rock loci of the Edwards Plateau
aspect were in existence in the Austin area shortly after
4,000 or 2,000 B. C. and lasted until about 1500 A.D. A period
of 3,000 to 5,000 years does not seem excessive for the formation of the two lowest terraces of the Colorado River and
the two corresponding terraces of Brushy Creek. This confirms Sellards’ view that the 20-foot terrace of Brushy Creek
is relatively recent in date, but that a considerable span of
time is necessary to account for its deposition, the subsequent channeling of the valley fill, and the formation of the
10-foot terrace.
The archeological materials of Merrell 1, 2, and 3 are incorporated in the deposits of the 20-foot terrace, but 1YferrelI
4, the upper midden, rests on the terrace surface and could
have been laid down at any time following the building of
the terrace. The notable differences in projectile point
forms between Merre]l 3 and 4 suggest that an appreciable
time interval may separate the two occupations. The inclusion of Merrell 1, 2, and 3 in the deposits of the 20-foot
terrace places those occupations early in the time period
indicated for the Edwards Plateau aspect. Merrell 4 is
probably much later, but certainly not later than 1500 A. D.
Conclusions

The Merrell site has yielded archeological materials which
indicate intermittent occupation over a long period of time
by a relatively early nomadic and food-gathering population.
The culture represented is a facies of the Edwards Plateau
aspect of the Balcones phase and includes elements of both
Clear Fork and Round Rock loci. Three of the four culturebearing strata are included in the 20-foot terrace of Brushy
33 Brushy Creek, it may be recall~I, is a part of the Brazos River drainage
~ystem. I~ terrace~ of the Colorado River can be correlated with terraces of
Brazos River, it should be POssible to give broad period dates to tertian archaeological sites rePOrted in the Wv~ o axea. See Bryan, 1935, p. 7, 1936a, 1936b,
IB6:1-I~66; MaCho 1936, 1937.
34 Kelley, 1947. pp. 105-106.

The Merrell Site

33

Creek, and this terrace is correlated with the 40-foot terrace
of the Colorado River, which also includes archeological
materials referable to the Clear Fork and Round Rock loci.
These two loci are thought to fall within the period of 4,000
or 2,000 B. C.-1,500 A. D. The three strata included in the 20foot terrace at the Merrell site are interpreted as belonging
to the first part of this period, but the fourth stratum rests on
the terrace surface and is probably much later in date. Occupation of the Merrell site ceased sometime prior to
1500 A. D.
BibIiography

Anonymous
1935a. Clues to ancient man in America found eighteen
feet underground in Texas. Science Service Mail
Report, January 18, 1935.
1935b. Important archeological discovery made by J. E.
Pearce near Austin, Texas. Science Service Research Aid Announcement, no. 284, January 24, 1935.
1935c. Ancient man in Texas. Science, n. s., Supplement,
vol. 81, no. 209, January 25, 1935, p. 6.
1935d. Texas river terrace yields clues to ancient Americans. Science News Letter, vo!. 27, no. 721, February 2, 1935, p. 67.
Bryan, Frank
1935. A resume of the prehistoric cultural remains so far
discovered in central Texas. Central Texas Archeological Society, Bulletin, vol. 1, pp. 5-9.
1936a. Geological sketch of Moffat-Whitehall-Pendleton
area. Central Texas ArcheoIogicaI Society, Bulletin,
no. 2, pp. 28-29.
1936b. Evidence of recent movements along faults of Balcones system in central Texas. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, vol. 20, no.
10, pp. 1357-1371.

34

Texas Archeo~og~caI and Paleontological Society

Jackson, A. T.

1938. The Fall Creek sites. The University oS Texas, Anthropological Papers, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 11-118.
1939. A deep archeological site in Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeoloftical and Paleontological Society,
Bulletin, vol. 11, pp. 203-225.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The cultural affiliations and chronological position
of the Clear Fork focus. American Antiquity, vol.
13, no. 2, pp. 97-109.
Kelley, J. Charles, and Campbell, T. N.
1942. What are thd burnt rock mounds of Texas? American Antiquity, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 319-322.
Kelley, J. Charles; Campbell, T. N.; and Lehmer, Donald J.
1940. The association of archeological materials with geological deposits in the Big Bend region of Texas.
West Texas Historical and ScientiSic Society, Publication no. 12 (Sul Ross State Teachers College,
Bulletin, vol. 21, no. 3).
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture complexes and chronology in northern Texas. The University oS Texas Publication, no. 4640.
Leighton, M. M.
1936.

Geological aspects of the finding of primitive man,
near Abilene, Texas. Preliminary report. Medallion Papers, no. 24, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.

Mason, J. K.
1936. Buried midden on the Brazos. Central Texas Archeological Society, Bulletin, no. 2, pp. 52-58.

The Merrell ~te

35

I937. Supplementary notes on buried midden on the
Brazos. Central Texas Archeologist, no. 3, pp. 68-69.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938. The Clear Fork culture complex. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, BulIet~n, vol. 10,
pp. 193-207.
Sellards, E. H.
1936. Recent studies of early man in the southwestern
part of the United States. The American NaturaIi~,
vol. 70, pp. 361-369.
1940. Early man in America: index to localities and selected bibliography. Geological Society o~ America,
Bulletin, vol. 51, pp. 373-432.
Woolsey, Arthur M.
1938. Additional Buchanan Lake sites. The University of
Texas, Anthropological Papers, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 119145.
December, 1947.

36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

SURVEY OF TWENTY COKE
COUNTY SITES
CYRUS N. RAY
At some period of the past the river and creek valleys of
Central West Texas were scoured out to depths much greater
than exist today, and at a subsequent period all of these
valleys were filled to a considerable depth with a thick
stratum of coarse gravel which contained many water worn
stones of larger size. These stones are of various sizes and
kinds, conglomerates and hard quartzites of several colors
are common, but small rounded limestones seem to be the
most numerous variety, and these are often mixed with
quartz sand. In many localities rising moisture has left
soluble !ime salts in the form of caliche cement which has
converted the beds of gravel and sand into beds of conglomerate and soft sandstone, but in other cases they remain only
as compact gravel. At most localities these deposits are
devoid of the fossils by means of which one might determine
the period of their deposition, but in some sites scattered
throughout the whole region fossil bones and teeth of the
Columbian Mammoth have been found imbedded in these
gravel beds, and this would seem to indicate that this deposition occurred during the Pleistocene. Evidently the present
highland area between the drainages of the Clear Fork of the
Brazos, and of the Colorado River, situated in Taylor, Nolan
and Coke Counties, had a much greater altitude then than
at present, and the valleys below were filled with the products of its erosion. In the time subsequent to the deposition
of this uniform sheet of gravel over all the valleys on both
sides of the central plateau, a different thing seems to have
happened to this thick gravel sheet in the valleys of the north
and northeast slopes in Taylor, Nolan, Fisher and Jones
Counties from what happened in the valleys of the south to
southwest mountain slopes in Runnels and Coke Counties.
For many miles on the north side of the mountains, and up
to and including the mountain valleys and ravines opening

Survey o:f Twenty Coke County Sites

37

out on their northern slopes comparatively few remnants~of
this gravel sheet remain, but occasiona!ly one sees small
areas of consolidated remnants Of this gravel in the form of
conglomerate beds. These Hawley gravel and conglomerate
beds only oc.casionally occur on the north side of the mountains, and then usually are down near the bottoms of the
high river banks.’ In places these sites occur along the
course of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River, but throughout
most of the area the gravel has been entirely removed by
erosion and the same space in the river valleys has subsequently been entirely filled with seven regularly deposited
Nugent and Clear Fork silts to a depth of thirty or more
feet.~
On the southwest side of the highlands only a comparatively small area of mountain valleys in northeast Coke
County, and on the extreme northern edge of Runnels
County, contain deposits of Nugent and Clear Fork silts like
those to be found in the valleys on the north side of the
mountains. In Coke County the Pleistocene gravel deposits
which fill the valley of the Colorado River and the valleys of
its larger tributaries on both sides seem to have remained in
almost undisturbed thickness at most of the places examined by the writer. In a few stream banks where the gravel
does not exist, or possibly where the gravel has been eroded
away, the river banks are filled in with a deposit which
evidently is quite recent and probably is comparable with
if not identical with the Fort Griffin silt. In a general survey
of the high banks of the streams of Coke County the writer
has found little evidence of very ancient inhabitation except
i~ a small area in the northeast corner of the county where
Clear Fork sites occur in the same type of formation that
they do north of the mountains. In Coke County no sites
buried as much as a foot in depth were found more than two
miles west and the same distance south of the Kickapoo
Mountains, which lie a few miles to the southwest of Fort
Chadbourne Station. From the region of old Fort Chad-

! Ray, Cyrus lq., Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Re,on. Bulletin of The
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Vol. I6, 1944.,15.
2 Ray. Cyrus N.
The Facts Concerning The Clear Fork Culture. American
Antiquity Vol. 13, No. 4, April 1948.

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

bourne west to new Fort Chadbourne Station, and for a mile
north of there, and for a distance of three or four miles southwest of that railroad Station, the mountain valleys have been
filled with the Nugent and Clear Fork silts, and the Clear
Fork silts there contain the same types of Clear Fork, Yuma,
and Folsom artifacts, as are to be found in the same formao
tions on the north side of the mountains. A site situated
about a mile across the valley west of Nipple Peak, which
is one of the Kickapoo mountains, is the farthest west
location of any definite Clear Fork site found in Coke
County. One Clear Fork gouge was found in a red deposit
about one mile west of that site at the base of a mountain,
but in all the rest of the county west and south of there
nothing resembling either a Clear Fork, a Folsom or a Yuma
dart head was found, nor was there any evidence of the
Clear Fork silts in the stream banks, and nothing which
could be classed as Nugent silts except at one Kickapoo
Creek bank situated a short distance east of Bronte where
the bank was topped by two bands of silt similar in color to
Nugent Silts 4 and 5, but there were no evidences of middens
or hearth stones in them. Evidently, the dryer climate, and
perhaps the uncertainty of a good water supply farther
west, caused early man to choose sites farther east.

zi e (I)
Site (I) is a rock shelter in the east bank of Oak Creek
situated near the Highway 158 bridge over that creek. A
panel of pecular criss-cross rock carvings extends across the
roof of this rock shelter. This site was discovered and
described in the 1930 Bulletin of The Society by Mr. E. B.
Sayles, and he then stated that "four strata of charcoal3
and other evidences of occupation were encountered, each
separated by a stratum of sterile silt and clay." Part of the
site had been disturbed by treasure hunters prior to the excavation by Sayles and his findings of artifacts in place in the
cave were too few on which to make a determination of the
stone cultures. This rock shelter or shallow cave is now
3 Sayles, F~ B.
Archaeological
4, ~, and 6.

and

A Rock Shelter in Coke County, Bulletin of the Texas
Paleontological

Society.

VoL

2,

1930,

pp.

33-40,

Plates

Survey o~ Twenty Coke County Sites

39

devoid of any earth filling and the site has been worked over
for twenty years by treasure hunters attracted by the ruins
of Fort Chadbourne, which lie a short distance to the south
of it. A historic Indian’s grave formerly was on the top of
a small hillock a short distance to the north of the shelter,
and blue and white glass beads are still occasionally found
there. The form of criss-cross petroglyph decoration of rock
shelter wall panels shown there has only been found at two
other sites, one in a cave shelter on the north slope of Blowout Mountain in Taylor County, and the other on the south
face of the cap rock of Turner Mountain, situated about two
miles southwest of Fort Chadbourne Station in Coke County."
Site (2)
Site (2) is situated about a mile north of new Fort Chadbourne Station, here a lane follows the Santa Fe railroad
north on its west side, and the site lies west of the lane where
a small dry branch of Oak Creek crosses the road. Here a
gentle slope down toward the south is covered with a gravel
layer, and old hearths are eroding from gullies in this gravel,
and also from the underlying red silt, and from gravel
hillocks nearer to the creek. Farther northwest and up the
creek’s course the small now dry creek bed is bounded by
higher banks where it goes through higher ground, and the
tops of these banks are composed of a shallow deposit of tan
colored silt which is underlaid with several feet of dark red
Lower Clear Fork silt and gravel, and hearths are eroding
from these old red deposits on the sides of the creek banks.
This site was found about ten years ago, and has been inspected at intervals since then, and in it all of the early
types of implements of the Clear Fork culture have been
found such as flint gouges, spokeshaves, side scrapers, disks,
gravers, abrading stones, recessed based knives, punches or
awls, and some round manos of the type which have one
edge worn down thin, while the opposite edge remains thick.
The darts were of Clear Fork classes one and two which
probably are the oldest dart head forms of that culture, as
4 K~rkland, Forrest, Petrogly~hs of the Abilene District.
Bulletin of the Texaz
Archeological and Paleontological Society.
Vo]. 13, 1941.
Plates 11 and 12.

4O

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

these types occur buried in old red silt in the lower lying
river and creek valley’s high creek banks, at depths below
the present soil surface of twenty-four feet.~ A few ancient
end scrapers of large size were found in this site, and Mr.
Joe Ben Wheat, while on a visit to the site in 1940, found a
crystal quartz scraper. Also the writer has found in this
site several fine recessed based, but not channelled blades
which could be classified as Yuma points. Most of the different types of Clear Fork gouges were found there also.
On a somewhat higher shelf just west of the creek branch is
a considerable area of land covered with very large, highly
polished conglomerate boulders.6 A number of ancient sites
have been found in that region which were located adjacent
to such accumulations of polished boulders, and such boulders seem to have held an attraction for men of the Clear
Fork culture period especially, and perhaps so for some
others. The small branch of Oak Creek which winds through
this site is now dry, except immediately after rains, but it
must have held water when the site was occupied, as there
is no other apparent source in that locality.
Site (3)

Site (3) is located about one and one-half miles south
and one and one-half miles west of Fort Chadbourne
Station and on the north side of a small lane. The site
covers a large area around, and north and east of a
steep rocky escarpment, which lies in an east and west
direction close beside the road, On the north side of the
escarpment is a high nearly level shelf, which was once
occupied, and hearths are eroding from shallow gullies in
its rocky surface, and from this area a low rocky ridge winds
off to the northeast to a high rocky conical shaped mountain,
and the land on the north sides of these elevations slopes
gradually off to the northeast toward a small dry creek
which traverses a narrow valley, which opens out between
the mountains still farther north. This creek branch drains
5 P~ty. Cyrus ~.. The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulleti~ of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, 1938, Plates 24 and 25.
6 P~y, Cyrus N., Permian Polished Boulders of Texas, BuIletin of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vo!. 17, 1946.
Plates 14, 16, and 17.

Survey of Twenty Coke County Sites

41

southeastward into the middle fork of Kickapoo Creek.
Gullies on the mesquite filled north slope of the ridge
between the two mountains are filled with hearth debris.
The banks of the small dry creek branch were occupied for
a distance of more than a mile to the north during Clear Fork
time, and the old hearths are eroding from Lower Clear
Fork red silt and gravel at depths of two to three feet
beneath the present soil surface all along its course back
into the mountain valley. All of the components of the Clear
Fork Culture have been found there. In one place five
round mano stones were found embedded in a circle in
ancient red Lower Clear Fork Silt, and these manos were in
various stages of being ground down in the manner which
wears down one edge thin and leaves the opposite edge
with almost if not quite its original thickness. It is evident
such a worn mano was held by one edge and the implement
rotated in such manner as to wear it away only on one edge.
The only whole metate found was large, round, and thick,
and had two relatively small, round holes worn down in it
close to the middle, this type has been found also in a Clear
Fork site in Taylor County north of the Edwards Plateau.
One rare gouge with curved cutting edges at both ends was
found, and portions of two different Folsom points were
found on the high terrace on the north side of the roadside
escarpment. The largest concentration of hearths is more
than a mile north of the roadside escarpment, and situated
above two earthen water reservoirs. Here Clear Fork darts
1, 2, and 3, fish tail darts, and many other ancient types of
darts were found, as wel! as most of the types of gouges.
Near the east base of the roadside escarpment and also on
the flat between that and the conical mountain to the northeast are a number of half embedded large boulders of San
Angelo conglomerate, which have a glass-like polish over
most of their surfaces. Ancient artifacts erode from the
roadside ditches, and also from a dry gully which runs south
just east of the polished boulders. There artifacts are buried
two or three feet deep in dark red silt.
On the top of the roadside escarpment is a cap-rock about
twenty feet in thickness, which faces the south and over-

42

Texas ArcheoIog~cal. and Paleontologica~ Society

hangs for a considerable distance in an east to west direction,
and on this sheltered hard sandstone ledge is the largest
number of the peculiar criss-cross petroglyphs ever found.
These carvings seem to be in good condition except where
they have been blasted off by ignorant treasure hunters or at
the east end where rain has gotten to them and has eroded
the hard sandstone away to a considerable depth. There also
are a few petroglyphs on a group of large boulders down
near the base of the escarpment near its west end. At an
estimated distance of about one-fourth mile northeast of the
roadside escarpment lies a round mountain which stands out
away from the others and at the southwest base of this is a
rocky shelf, and below this there are two rock shelter overhangs, which probably were occupied in ancient times, as
much broken flint lies below them. The shelter to the south
has a panel of eroded criss-cross petroglyphs on its walls
inside the cave, and another panel is down near the floor,
and some more higher up, and there are several more on the
edge of a large boulder which lies just outside the cave and
north of the overhang. The stone inside the shelter here does
not seem to be as hard as that on the roadside escarpment,
and. has flaked off to some extent, and the carvings are not
preserved in as good condition as on the mountain to the
southwest. The gullies which erode the north side of this
round mountain contain artifacts which erode from dark
red silt and gravel, and a gravel strewn slope above a small
earthen water reservoir also contains hearths and artifacts.
The hummocks of valley gravel deposit above the creek
branch northeast of the water reservoir have been much
eroded, and show about fifteen inches of tan sandy Nugent
silts on top, with twelve or fifteen inches of dark Clear Fork
silts beneath them, and the latter lies on top of a layer of
gravel. The numerous hearths and artifacts are eroding
from the bottom of the dark red silt layer and the gravel
under it. Of the three sites found which contain the peculiar
criss-cross petroglyphs two were surrounded by very large
Clear Fork Culture campsites, and people of that culture had
lived near to all three, but there also were some indications
of later occupations of all of these sites, so one cannot

Survey o~f Twenty Coke CountN Sites

43

identify the petroglyphs as the work of any particular culture type of man. A small elevated sandy shelf just west of
the fnain escarpment was covered with unpatinated flints,
end scrapers and other signs of a small later encampment.
Severe! hundred yards west of the roadside escarpment a
dry branch from the north crosses the road, and this has cut
down through the silts of the fiat valley floor to a depth of
about twenty feet, and in the bottom has cut across a gravel
deposit which contains several forms of large patinated dart
heads.

At a distance of about three miles south of Fort Chadbourne Station, on a lane which parallels the Santa Fe railroad, a small dry branch of the middle section of Kickapoo
Creek runs south between the lane and the railroad, and on
the east side of this creek two or three feet of its silt banks
have been eroded into gullies down to a hard caliche base.
Here a few hearths were embedded in the silt at different
depths but most seemed to be of intermediate age. There were
eight large partly patinated end scrapers, mostly roughly finished except on the cutting edges, two partly patinated side
scrapers, one knife, one graver, and one long stemmed and
barbed dart head of intermediate age were four~d~ One
handaxe, two gravers, two side scrapers, and a two-edged
pointed side scraper, of patinated older types were found,
which perhaps may be of Clear Fork culture.

Zite (5)
Site (5) is located one mile south of the north section of a
lane which makes a circuit around the Kickapoo mountains
and is about three and one-half miles southwest of Site (3)
and one and one-fourth miles southwest of Nipple Peak.
Just north of this site is a small rocky escarpment and there
is an earthen water reservoir near its base. A short distance
below the face of the escarpment north and west dry
branches of West Kickapoo Creek join to form that creek,
and around this juncture is a considerable area of gravel
deposit, and also of Lower Clear Fork Silt. Most of the later

44

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

deposits have been removed by erosion from above the Clear
Fork deposits here.
In these gravel and dark red silt deposits numerous old
hearths are embedded for a considerable distance both South
and north of the juncture of the creek branches. Most of
the artifacts found are of the Clear Fork culture, are heavily
patinated and are definitely eroding from the old red silts
and gravel altmg with the hearths around which they lie.
Apparently this site had been searched rather completely
for dart and spear heads, and with the exception of one No. 2
Clear Fork dart head and one rough leaf shaped blade the
others found were broken, of these three bases of the broad
fish tail shaped dart head were found. This type of heavily
patinated fish tail shaped dart head, is often found in Clear
Fork sites, and it is probable that the ancient fish tail type
may also be a component of that culture. Darts with divided
bases of many types were used throughout a long period of
time, and there are several different types of bifurcated
based dart heads which flare outward at the ends, and these
should not be mistaken for the broad and more crudely made
outward flared bases of a late unpatinated type of dart of the
same region. The type from Clear Fork sites is thick, broad
and always heavily patinated, it is wide in the middle,
barbed and sharply recessed in the middle of the base from
which point the base ends flare outward in the shape of the
tai! of a fish. These points have been found in greater or
lesser numbers in all Clear Fork sites. Two plain shouldered
and recessed thick dart bases were found, two broken drills,
and one whole one, and each was of a different shape, one
had a chisel shaped base and two had flat flake bases, one
broken No. 2 Clear Fork dart head was found. Seven complete heavy knives or picks, four hand axes, ten gouges,
fourteen side scrapers, seven large thick end scrapers, and
nine large knife fragments were found. Five of the knife
bases were of the recessed type. Three Clear Fork triangular
flake points, one graver and one spokeshave were found. In
addition to the above list some unpatinated artifacts were
also found in a gully in a later silt deposit near the southeast
end of the site.

Survey of Twenty Coke County Sites

45

Site (6)
Site (6) is located about one-half mile southeast of Site
(5) and on the same west branch of Kickapoo Creek where
it flows southward closely past the base of a conical mountain which stands out in the middle of the flat valley, about
one and one-half miles from the Kickapoo Mountains which
lie northeast of it, and farther away from the mountains to
the northwest. At the north foot of the mountain is an
eroded slope in dark red silt which contains many hearths
and quantities of broken up flint which is mostly unpatinated.
Above the camp deposit is the debris of a white man’s house
of about thirty years ago. Someone has completely removed
the artifacts from the Indian site, and the house also is gone.
Considerable flaked flint occurs on the lower lying terrace
above the creek ~t the west base of the mountain, but the
principal occupation of the site was at the south base of the
mountain on a red gravelly stream terrace, and here are
many hearths and piles of flint flakes of two different periods
of occupation. The older flints were mostly patinated, and
of these there were ten side scrapers, five rough rounded
scrapers, two spokeshaves, and two triangular flake points
of Clear Fork type. In addition there were seven unpatinated end scrapers, one oval mano, and two late small dart
heads, and one large barbed spear head with ends broken.
In addition were two large square based barbed dart bases.
On the plain near the creek are scattered recent hearths,
surrounded by unpatinated end scrapers, and these occur in
groups at intervals on the flood plain, all the way north up
the creek from Site (6) to the south edge of Site (5), and
probably are remains of a rather late occupation. Site (6)
probably was occupied at ~east three or more different times,
judging from the accumulation of artifacts of at least three
different stages of patination and types of workmanship. It
is probable that Clear Fork men, men of the intermediate
ages, and then men who used the very latest unpatinated
forms of end scrapers and oval manos inhabited the site.
The writer knows of no instance where a conical shaped
mountain which sets off at some distance in a valley or plain,
separated from the other mountains of a region, where there

Texas ArcheologicaI and PaleontologicaI Society

are any signs of even a dry stream or a weak spring ever
having been nearby that does not have a camp site near its
base.

Apparently the round mountains which stand off

away from the others served as outlook places where Indians
could survey activities in large areas of surrounding lowlands and also as landmarks by means of which one could
locate the villages at their bases from distances of many
miles across the plains.

In many cases the bed rock stones

on the summits are still reddened from ancient signal fires.

Site (7) is located on East Kickapoo Creek one mile north
and one mile east of the town of Bronte, here the creek
crosses an east and west lane, and the site is south of both
the road and the creek. A steep lone mountain rises not far
south of the lane, on top of which is a monument of the U. S.
Geodetic Survey.

A large area near the stream is covered

with hearths and piles of unpatinated flint flakes and fragments, which probably were left by the latest stone age
occupants of the site. The vertical creek banks here show no
signs of other than surface, or near surface hearths. A roammoth’s tooth had eroded from the grhvel stratum at the bottom of the bank here, but this was far below any signs of
human activity. South of the main creek some deep gullies
cut into a gravel covered slope which is studded with large
rounded off, and polished, San Angelo conglomerate boulders. There are many hearths embedded in the top of the
gravel there and these hearths are surrounded by much man
fractured and flaked flint, which is mostly patinated. This
site is large in area but it evidently has been so thoroughly
searched for artifacts by successive generations of boys from
the nearby town that one now is unable to get enough fragments of implements with which to identify the culture
types used there. A ’few unpatinated end scrapers were
found in the latest occupied portion of the site, a small area
close to the creek on the west end. The polished conglomerate boulders here had the shining appearance of being sleet

Survey o] Twenty Coke County Sites

47

t

I

Plate 5
Location

of

twenty

archeological

sites

in

Coke

County.

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

covered when the writer first saw them on a cold day.. The
flint debris and hearths on the slope below these polished
boulders have some appearance of age in their white patina°
tion, but it would be necessary to excavate to be able to. find
enough artifacts to make any estimates relating to the flint
cultures. It would seem that these shining boulders were an
attraction to stone age man wherever they occurred, as in
every place where they have been found a camp site either
surrounds them, or is very close to them.

Site (8) is located three miles southwest of Bronte where
a high rocky escarpment known as Cedar Mountain rises
close beside the Colorado River, on its north bank. A small
dry creek cuts into the south base of Cedar Mountain as the
creek enters the Colorado River and a small camp is located
on a shelf at the southwest base of the mountain and on the
east bank of the creek. Here are piles of broken flint and
many burnt rock hearths, which are embedded either in the
surface or just beneath it. Several unpatinated end and side
scrapers and half of a shallow rounded metate were found.
This metate shows the fine peck marks of the sharpening of
its shallow basin, and of the rounding off of its edges by the
same peck method. Here also the nearness to a town probably explains the absence of projectile points. This small
site was thickly covered with the recent burnt rock mound
deposits of the Colorado River region, which evidently are
of no great age, and have no cultural or time connections
with the ancient burnt rock deposits associated with the
Clear Fork Culture. Only in two sites were any artifacts
found which resemble Clear Fork Culture types in Coke
County outside of the mountain valleys on the head waters
of Kickapoo Creek in the northeast corner of Coke County.
No sites which contained Clear Fork darts and gouges were
found in the rest of Coke County.

Site (9) is located on Mountain Creek at a distance of
about one mile northeast of the town of Robert Lee. Mou~atain Creek is a large creek which flows in from the north

Survey oS Twenty Coke County Si~es

49

through Robert Lee to there join the Colorado River. Here
there are numerous surface hearths of large rounded stones
on top of the high east side creek banks and much hearth
debris is also on a flood plain at a much lower level on the
west side in an old cultivated field. The site is located where
a natural sandstone dyke crosses the stream from east to
west. The rounded stone hearths on top of the bluff on the
east side were surrounded by much broken flint and an
unpatinated hand axe made similarly to those of the ancient
Clear Fork Culture, a large oval mano stone and some unpatinated end scrapers were found. This mano had been
worn down into wedge shape, but despite this form of wear,
which seems to have been an ancient method of use, the
writer does not think that this surface site is a very old one.
In the flood plain field on the east side two large oval mano
stones and another unpatinated hand axe were found but
the site had been almost completely denuded of projectile
points, probably by boys from the nearby town. One thick
barbed and stemmed point with a recessed base was found.

site (lo)
Site (10) is located about one and one-half miles south of
Highway 158 as it nears the town of Robert Lee and is a
small site in a cultivated field about one-half mile southwest
of the air beacon which is east of Robert Lee. Here there
is an area covered with considerable burnt rock debris and
flint and in it were found one square ended oval mano stone,
two flint ball hammerstones, two square based flint knives,
one unpatinated dart head had an expanded convex base,
and was stemmed and shouldered, and another dart head
must have been of an earlier type picked up and brought into
the site as it was patinated and had a bifurcated base of long
mammalate shape similar to the Folsom types. There also
were two side scrapers. Most of the flint was unpatinated,
one hammerstone was patinated and the other not.
Site (11)
Site (11) is located on Cow Creek, which crosses Highway
158 between Bronte and Robert Lee. On the north side of
the road a small creek branch enters Cow Creek from the

5O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

northwest and hearths project from the soil surface along
both banks of Cow Creek for a considerable distance north,
and also between it and the small creek branch.

On the

south side of the highway hearths are scattered along both
creek banks for about one-half mile south, to where ruins
of an old bridge cross Cow Creek. On the south side a large,
thick and round mano stone was exposed on the creek bank
margin by recent erosion where it had been covered about
six inches in depth. Six unpatinated end scrapers were
found around hearths, and four patinated side scrapers similar to the diverse forms and thick shapes found most often
in Clear Fork sites. Also one of the flake points of the type
where two widely separated flaked edges come to a point,
these also usually are found most frequently in Clear Fork
Culture sites, however neither darts, nor gouges of that culture were found. A square based knife and a long fish tail
shaped dart of gray patination were found there. The hearths
in this site are embedded in unbroken sod and have the appearance of recentness, although some of the artifacts from
a gravelly slope do not. It is evident that several occupations
must have occurred, and the older artifacts have been eroded
out onto the later occupation levels. A hearth showed an
almost round ring of rounded stones with earth in the center,
forty inches in diameter. On digging out the earth filled
center, a flat rock lined round basin was revealed, and the
reddened stones and traces of charcoal showed that it had
been used as a fire pit. In this area some sandstone boulders
and ledges in the creek have produced water holes behind
them, and it is evident that the area has been occupied at
several different times, but most of the camp debris seems to
be not more than half covered with soil. Considering that so
large an area was covered with surface hearths there were
relatively few artifacts to be found.
Site (12)
Site (12) is located on Highway 208 about seven miles
northwest of the town of Robert Lee, and on the west side of
the road. After crossing Yellow Wolf Creek a clump of very
tall pecan trees may be seen several hundred yards north-

Survey o~ Twenty Coke County Sites

west of the bridge, the site is north of the grove on a small
rise of land above a bend in the creek.

Here is a group of

the tallest and largest pecan trees the writer ever saw, the
largest was four feet and seven inches in diameter and about
one hundred feet tall, and was one of four large trees in
three quarters of a ring, as though these giant trees had
sprouted around the stump of a much larger tree. Evidently
this site had been located because of the pecan grove in a
region where there are very few large trees. The site is composed of surface hearth rings of large rounded stones which
project halfway out of the soil, like most other Coke County
sites. Here several unpatinated end scrapers were found.
Across south from the pecan grove is a vertical creek bank
about forty or fifty feet high, and which extends for a considerable distance around a creek bend, and the length of this
was examind from the dry creek bed below, and there were
no signs of middens or hearths anywhere. This high bank
seems to be of the gravel and rounded boulder composition,
probably pleistocene, which is so characteristic of Coke
County valleys, and this formation occupies the space up
from the original Permian nearly to the present soil surface.
On examination of the top of this high bank a few hearth
rings were seen embedded in the unbroken soil surface grass
roots.
Site (20)
Site (20) is located several hundred yards from the road
up Yellow Wolf Creek, but on the east side of the highway,
northeast of the same creek bridge and about opposite to
Site (12). Here a very long high bank on the north side of
the creek is visible from the road. An examination of this
bank from the dry creek bed below showed about the same
construction as on the west side of the highway downstream
and there was no visible evidence of human occupation in
this long section of high bank. Return to the road was made
along the bluff tops until a draw was crossed which opened
into the creek from the north. Here the creek bank is not
so high as farther east but was thirty or more feet high and
vertical in most places. On the west side of the draw a gen-

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

tle slope draws down from the hill above to the bluff edge.
In this space were a number of hearths embedded in the
grass and these were composed of small rings of large water
rounded stones from the stream bed. Here no scrapers were
found, but two unpatinated dart heads were, one was plain
leaf shaped and one had the latest used form of bifurcated
dart base found in Texas. The end of the base of such a
point is recessed and the forked processes are spreading,
rather than dependent as most of the early forms are, with
the exception of the ancient spreading fish-tail type. Two
side scrapers and the base of a large rough knife were found.
The side scrapers were the only. patinated artifacts and may
belong to an earlier occupation of the site. A portion of the
site was on an eroded slope, but most of the hearths of the
area were half embedded in grass roots, and did not have
any appearance of age. Half of a rounded edged oval mano
stone, which had been used on both faces was found beside
one of the hearths. The hearths were scattered for some
distance back up the slope from above the edge of the creek
bank, and on down to the very edge of the top of the vertical
creek bank, and some of the hearth stones hung loosely out
of the edges of the hearths so that when dislodged they fell
straight down into the creek bed. Such hearths must have
been some distance back of the brink when used, and this
shows that several feet of very firm bank underlaid about
half the way up by a sandstone ledge must have caved off
since the hearths were made, and yet the hearths farther
back up the slope stuck half way out of the grass roots.
Site (13)
Site (13) is on the main western branch of Kickapoo
Creek down stream below sites (5) and (6), and this site
lies over two miles northwest of the town of Bronte, and
almost south of the Kickapoo Mountains’. At this place on
the creek below a corner in a country lane a natural conglomerate stone dyke crosses the creek and impounds a hole
of water above it. The creek banks along both sides were
strewn with hearths which had diameters of three or four
fe~t, and were composed of the usual water rounded hearth

Survey oS Twenty Coke County Sites

53

stones of Coke County which are larger than those so used
farther east. There were many man made flint flakes scattered around but very few formed artifacts were found.
One late form, unpatinated, spreading bifurcated based, dart
head was found, and no scrapers. The absence of scrapers
seems strange as most sites in the Abilene region have been
picked rather clean of dart heads and knives, but one usually
can still find from two to three to a dozen or more end scrapers in even the smaller late sites of that region, but this is
not true of Coke County sites and this leads one to wonder
if scrapers ever were found there in any considerable numbers, and if not so why not, since the area must have been
well within the range of the bison where usually large unpatinated end scrapers are abundant. Some of these hearths
with no surrounding artifacts might have been used by the
historic Kickapoo Indians who are said to have hunted over
the region about the time Fort Chadbourne was built, and
to have camped on aid given the creek its name.
Site (!4)
Site (14) is situated on Valley View Creek about six miles
south of the town of Robert Lee. Here the creek crosses
Highway 208 from the west, and there are collections of
hearths on the eroded edges of the tops of the banks on both
sides of the road. The hearths on the south side contained no
artifacts except one late type bifurcated dart head, but a collection of hearths on the north side, located farther from
the road, were surrounded by much flint and a few artifacts
which seemed older than most of those usually found in the
region, as all but two of eight found were patinated. These
were one large rough oval shaped blade, one large end and
side scraper, one long side scraper similar to a Clear Fork
type, two oval rough knives, one heavy end scraper, a section of a large twisted shaft knife, and one complete unpatinated blade of long triangular shape, which has widely
bevelled edges and a nearly square base, and is nearly sixeighths of an inch in thickness in the center, although well
made.

54

Texas Archeo~ogica~ and Pa~eo~toZog~ca~ Societ, y

Sites (15) and (I6)
In the northwest portion of Coke County a country lane
makes a large oval circuit from the highway at Silver,
around the Jameson Oil Field over to the high banks of the
Colorado River, and then back to the highway farther north.
At the end farthest from the paved highway the lane winds
around northward on top of the highest terrace above the
Colorado River.

In making the circuit south from Silver

the debris of an Indian camp site is seen in the road when
one first makes a near approach to the river banks, and as the
road winds around the circuit and starts to turn northward
again at a place above a bend in the Colorado many hearths
and much debris of a site may be seen in and beside the
lane, and in the eroded hillsides below the lane at this place.
On both visits approaching thunder storms drove the writer
back to the paved road before a complete search could be
made, but no artifacts were found in either of these areas
although there was much broken flint.

(is)
This site is located on the eroded east ter~race of a branch
of Oak Creek which flows south about one-half mile east of
old Fort Chadbourne on the Wylie Ranch and is definitely a
Clear Fork Culture site. A number of Clear Fork gouges
were found there on the first examination of the site about
four years ago, and on a recent visit the artifacts found were
three gouges, one flint punch, one round thick scraper, one
spokeshave, one large flake base-grave~, one combination
side and end scraper, and two dart heads. One dart head
was of broad fish tail type and one was shouldered and
stemmed, and also the base of a square based knife. A Pinto
Point was also found in this site.
Site (19)
Site (19) is on the west side of Highway 70 just north of
the Colorado River bridge south of the town of Bronte. On

Survey o~ Twenty Coke County Sites

55

the high river terrace several hundred yards west of the
bridge the hearth debris of an Indian camp site is scattered
o~ver an eroded area.

Much broken flint and mussel shells,

and fire reddened hearth stones are exposed there, but the
artifacts have been removed. One long narrow flake scraper
was all that was found, this was made by flaking a long
narrow sliver off of a rounded flint nodule and then running
a minute retouch along one edge and up around one end to
a point.

The original crust was left all over the rest except

for the flat face left when the flake was made.
Conclusions
Nearly all of the sites in Coke County with the exception
of those in the northeast corner of the County have an appearance of having been made not very long ago, a few
hundreds of years at most, but surprisingly no arrowheads
of the small late pottery types were found with the exception
of a very few found in the older occupied region near Fort
Chadbourne, and none was found in the plains region where
the large stones of the hearths protrude from the grass roots
as though placed there quite recently.

Also

not one

potsherd was found in any campsite in Coke County,
although potsherds have been reported from both east and
west of Coke County. The great scarcity of both the large
and small forms of end scrapers is also surprising in that
the area evidently was within the bison range.
Whenever high vertical banks of either creeks, or of the
Colorado River were seen, an examination was made of them
from below by walking down the dry beds of the streams,
and this was made uncommonly easy by a nearly rainless
season.

In all of the area no hearths were to be seen below

grass roots depth except in the mountain valleys of the Clear
Fork Culture area in the northeast corner of Coke County.

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

REFERENCES

(1) Ray, Cyrus N., Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region,
Bulletin of The Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society. Vol. 16, 1944-45.

(2)

Ray, Cyrus N., The Facts Concerning The Clear Fork
Culture. American Antiquity. Vol. 13, No. 4, April 1948.

(3)

Sayles, E. B., A Rock Shelter in Coke County, Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
Vol. 2, 1930, pp. 33-40, Plates 4, 5, and 6.

(4) Ray, Cyrus N., The Clear Fork Culture Complex, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 10, 1938, Plates 24 and 25.
(5) Ray, Cyrus N., Permian Polished Boulders of Texas,
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 17, 1946, Plates 14, 16, and 17.

(6)

Kirkland, Forrest, Petroglyphs of the Abilene District,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society. Vol. 13, 1941, Plates 11 and 12.

Archaeological Survey o] McGee Bend Reservoir

57

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF McGEE BEND

RESERVOIR: A .PRELIMINARY REPORT’
ROBERT L.

STEPHENSOIq

Introduction
Preliminary plans having been completed, a large dam
and reservoir is proposed for construction on the Angelina
River in East Texas. This dam, known as McGee Bend Dam
and Reservoir, will be a concrete and earth fill structure
130 feet high with 1,000 feet of concrete fill and 10,920 feet
of earth fill. The normal pool level will be 173 feet above
sea level and the maximum flood pool will be 187.4 feet above
sea level. This dam is to be constructed primarily as a power
plant and secondarily as a flood control and water conservation measure.
The dam itself is located on the Angelina River in northern
Jasper County 25 miles upstream from the junction of the
Angelina and Neches Rivers. The reservoir will flood some
90 river miles up the Angelina, as well as 45 miles up the
Attoyac River, 45 miles up Ayish Bayou and 20 miles up Bear
Creek. The latter are all tributaries of the Angelina River.
Along the Angelina River the maximum width of the reservoir will be nearly 9 miles. This will form one of the largesi’
reservoirs in Texas, and will extend from Jasper County into
Sabine, San Augustine, Angelina and Nacogdoches Counties.
The Angelini River, a tributary of the Neches River, flows
southeast through the central part of East Texas. Several
major tributaries enter the Angelina from the north; none
from the south. This area lies in the physiographic province
of the coastal plains and is known as the eastern timbers
area of that province.~ The dam is located at the southern
edge .of a geographic rise in the general terrain. South of
Thls report is preliminary and based on surface findings only. When recomm,.~ded excavation of selected sites in this area is completed, a final report wilr_
Data based on E~in Raiz
W}~lt~.e Atw~d, Giun & Co., 1939.

Map

of

the

Landforms

of

the

Unit~

S~tes.

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the dam the average elevation above sea level is around 85
feet to 100 feet. North of the dam the terrain is considerably
more hilly and the average elevation is about 150 feet higher,
rising and becoming more hilly to the north.

The soil

throughout the area is extremely sandy with many deposits
of a very red clay. This red clay becomes more dominant
toward the northern end of the reservoir. Ferruginous
sandstones, brown and tan sandstones, chert, jasper, hematite, limonite and petrified woods (mostly hardwoods and
palms) are the common native rocks.
The rivers in this area have shallow basins with only one
terrace in evidence in most sections. The present floodplains
are wide and become inundated by periodic floods every
third year.~ These floods are often quite severe and the
Angelina has been known .to rise as much as 10 feet over
night. The climate is very humid with 60 inches of average
annual rainfall. Consequently, the river bottoms are covered with a dense, swampy vegetation of hardwoods,
palmettoes and other temperate zone mesophytic jungle
flora. The areas away from the river bottoms are covered
with a heavy growth of pine forests.4 Wild game is extremely abundant over most of the area at the present time.
Archaeological Survey
Under the direction of Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., Director of the River Basin Surveys, the author made an archaeological survey of the areas to be flooded by this reservoir.
This project is a part of the River Basin Surveys, a cooperative program of archaeological salvage between the Corps
of Engineers, Dept. of the U. S. Army, and the National Park
Service, and is under the direction and supervision of the
Smithsonian Institution.~
In the winter of 1939-40, The University of Texas-W.P.A.
program undertook a similar survey of this section of East
3 Data £rorn Hydrographs--Dara "B," U. $. Engineer Office, Galveston, Texas,
1938.
4 Parks, H. B., Corey. V. L., et al., 1938.
5 The permission of the Smithsonian Institution for publication of this article
has been kindly granted the author by Dr. Frank tL H. Roberts, Jr.

Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir

59

Texas. Field work was accomplished by Mr. Gus E. Arnold,
and over 200 sites were located in 15 counties.

Of these

sites, 23 are located in the area covered by the present survey. Arnold’s unpublished report was used as a base from
which to start the present survey and proved to be very
accurate and informative. The artifacts collected by Arnold
from the 23 sites in this area were re-examined and included
in the study of the artifacts from the present survey.~
The McGee Bend survey was begun in early January,
1948, and carried to completion on April 10, 1948. The 23
sites reported by Arnold were revisited and an additional 57
sites were located, making a total of 80 sites in all. Of these,
one is an artificial mound with a large accompanying village;
one is probably a small, artificial mound; and two others are
possibly very large, artificial mounds. The nature of the
latter three is not yet definitely known. Extensive test
trenching will be required to determine this point. The
remaining 76 sites are all open, occupational areas of varying
sizes and intensities of occupation. Many of these are small,
temporary camp sites from which little information can be
gained. Others appear to have been large villages and extensive excavation has been recommended at these sites.
Acknowledgments
To the Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the U. S. Army, and to
the National Park Service is due sincere gratitude for providing funds to make this survey possible. During the course
of the survey, the District Office of the Corps of Engineers in
Galveston, under the direction of Col. B. L. Robinson, was
very cooperative and helpful as were the Resident Engineer,
Mr. Fred Johnson, and his assistant, Mr. Tom Porter, at the
Jasper Field Office. Sincere thanks is expressed to the many
informants and landowners throughout the reservoir area
-who provided much valuable information in locating sites.
Also, during and subsequent to the survey, the Dept. of Anthropology of The University of Texas, under the chairman6 Information and materla| from Arnold’s survey
Anthropology, University o£ Texas, Austin, Texas.

is

on

file

at

the

Dept.

6O

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

ship of Dr. T. N. Campbell, extended its complete facilities
to the survey. The Dept. provided file information and laboratory and storage space.

Dr. Campbell and Mr. Alex

Krieger of that department gave unstintingly of their time
and valuable technical advice and criticisrm

Mr. Krieger

was especially helpful in the classification of pottery types.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to all these people.
Site Analysis~
41-42D6-10" is a large, Alto Focus village site located on
Bear Creek. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of
Dunkin Incised and Pennington Punctate Incised types.~ An
arrow point, an abrader and several Bosque Stemmed dart
points were also found.
41-42D6-9~ is a small, artificial (?) mound on Bear Creek
near the above site. It is 41& feet high and 30 feet in diameter. No artifacts were found here.
41-43C4-6" is a large, village site on Bear Creek near the
above two sites. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and
of Dunkin Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised, plain, Davis Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, and Belcher Ridged
types. Perdiz Pointed Stemmed arrowpoints, metates, and
flake scrapers were also found. The site shows Alto Focus
occupation with a secondary occupation in Bossier Focus
times.
41-43C4-3 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on Bear Creek.
Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Dunkin Incised.
Pennington Punctate-Incised and plain types.
41-43C4-1" is a large, Alto Focus village site on Bear Creek.
Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Dunkin Incised,
plain, and Belcher Ridged types. Two sherds of iYIarksville
Incised and one each of Poynor Engraved and Patton Engraved also occurred. Other artifacts found are: pitted
7 Those sites indicated by an asterisk have be~ recommended for further
excavation.
8 In all eases the pottery types are listed in order of their dominance in the
site.

Archaeological Survey o5 McGee Bend Reservoir

61

manos, a scraper, a hammerstone and a Perdiz Pointed Stemmed arrowpoint.
41-43C7-1 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on a tributary
of Bear Creek. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and
the few identifiable sherds are Davis Incised type.
41o43C7-5 is a small campsite on a tributary of Bear Creek.
No artifacts were found here.
41-43C7-2 is a small campsite on a tributary of Bear Creek.
Pottery is all plain, sand tempered. An abrader and a
projectile point were also found.
41-42D9-1 is a smal!, Alto Focus campsite on a tributary
of Bear Creek. Pottery is dominantly plain, sand tern-’
pered, but Dunkin Incised and Davis Incised wares also
occurred. Other artifacts found are an abrader, a scraper
and two arrowpoints.
41-42D9-2" is a large, Alto Focus village site on Bear
Creek. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of plain,
and Dunkin Incised types. A scraper and two Bosque
Stemmed dart points were also found.
41-42D9-3 is a small campsite on Bear Creek. Pottery is
dominantly sand tempered but the only identifiable sherd
is Taylor Engraved.
41-42D9-4 is a small campsite of indeterminate cultural
affiliation, located on Bear Creek.
41-42D9-6 is reported to be an old Indian cemetery, but
no graves nor artifacts were found here.
41-42D9-7" is a small, Alto Focus campsite on Ayish
Bayou. The few pot-sherds recovered are dominantly bone
tempered and of Dunkin Incised type.
41-42D9-8 is a small campsite overlooking Ayish Bayou
near the above site. No artifacts were recovered here.
41-42D9-9 is a natural salt lick around which artifacts
are reputed to have been found. Possibly this was an
aboriginal salt supply.

Texas Archeo~og~cal and Paleontological Society

62

41-42D6-11 is a small campsite on Ayish Bayou.

No arti-

facts were recovered here.
41-42D6-12 is a small, non-pottery campsite on Ayish
Bayou.

Several scrapers, two Ellis Stemmed dart~ points

and one triangular dart point were found here.
41-42D6-1" is a large village site on the east bank of Ayish
Bayou. Alto Focus occupation is dominant here with a
later occupation by Frankston Focus and/or Bossier Focus
people. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered with Dunkin
Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, Davis Incised, plain,
Hickory Fine Engraved, Weches Fingernail Impressed, Holly
Fine Engraved and Harrison Bayou Incised types occurring.
Killough Pinched and Belcher Ridged types were found in
relatively small percentages. All projectile points were
indeterminate in type.
41-42D6-2" is a large village site on the west bank of
Ayish Bayou. In all respects it is very similar to the above
site and possibly is a part of it.
41-42D9-5" is an artificial mound site with a large occompanying village. It is located 5n the Angelina River in the
southern corner of San Augustine County. The mound is
100 feet in diameter, circular, truncated, with top diameter
of 50 feet. It is now about 12 feet high, but has been higher
in the past. The fill is composed of yellow and gray sand
with some pockets of yellow clay. The village area is ten
or more acres in area, and occupation extends to a depth
of over two feet. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered
and of Dunkin Incised and plain types. An abrader, several
scrapers, a chopper, a small drill, and two arrow points
were also found. Alto Focus occupation is implied. This
is the most important site in the area for further excavation
due to its similarity and probable relationship to the Davis
Mound Site.~
41-42D9-11 is a small campsite on the south side of the
9 Newell, H. P. and Krieger, A. D., The
County, :East Texas, manuscript in preparation.

Georg~ C.

Davis

Site,

Cherokee

Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoi~

63

Angelina River opposite the above site. Very little material
was found here and the cultural affiliation is unknown.
41-42D9-10 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on the Angelina
River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered with Dunkin
Incised and Pennington Punctate-Incised sherds occurring.
Two scrapers and an arrow point were also found.
41-42D8-1 is a campsite on the Angelina River. No material was collected here, but a private collection from the site
was observed. All projectile points are of the large, dart
point type and the owner stated that no pottery had .ever
been found here. Apparently this is a non-pottery site.
41-42D8-2,3,4, and 5 are small, indeterminate campsites on
the Angelina River.
41-42D8-6" is a small village site 2 miles south of the
Angelina River. All sherds are sand tempered and the landowner reports a boatstone having been found here some
years ago.
41-42D8-7 and 41-42D5-12 are small, indeterminate campsites on the Angelina River.
41-42D5-10" and 11 are small, Bossier Focus village sites
on the Angelina River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Pease Brushed-Incised type.
41-42D5-6, 7, and 18 are small, indeterminate campsites
on the Angelina River.
41-42D4-6 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on the Angelina
River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Dunkin
Incised type.
41-42D4-5 is a small, non-pottery campsite on the Angelina
River, Scrapers and Sterrett Stemmed dart points were
found here.
41-42D4-4" is a small, Bossier Focus village site 2 miles
west of the Angelina River. Pease Brushed Incised ware
is dominant here.

64

Texas Archeotogical and Paleontological ~ociety

41-42D4-7 is reputed to be the historic camp of a group of
Indians led by "Chief Popher."

No material was recovered

here.
41-42D5-13 is a small, indeterminate campsite on the
Angelina River.
41-42D5-9~ is a large village site of Alto Focus occupation
with a later occupation by Bossier Focus people. Pottery
is dordinantly clay tempered and of Dunkin Incised, Maddox
Band Engraved and plain types. Scrapers, a large blade,
two Alba Barbell arrow points and one Cuney Stemmed
arrow point were also found.
41-42D5-8~ is a small village site on Harvey Creek, a
small tributary of the Angelina River. Alto Focus and
Frankston Focus occupation both seem to be indicated, The
pottery is dominantly both clay and sand tempered. The
few identifiable sherds are plain ware and Maydelle Incised.
A pitted mano, several scrapers, a triangular dart point and
two abraders were also found. This site, the above site,
and the following six sites, all on or near Harvey Creek,
represent a relative]y small area with a heavy concentration
of aboriginal population. Apparently this concentration of
sites took place over a long period of time from early prepottery times to the historic period.
41-42D5-1~ is a large village site on Harvey Creek. Alto
and Bossier Foci are both represented here in Dunkin In~cised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, Weches Fingernail Impressed and Pease Brushed-Incised wares. Four sherds of
Patton Engraved ware may indicate historic Allen Focus
influence. Alba Barbed arrow points, Ellis Stemmed dart
points, several scrapers, a polished celt, an abrader, a metate
and several pitted manos were also found here. There is
some indication here of a sectional differentiation of artifacts
within the site.
41-42D5-4" and 5* are two nearly adjoining sites on Harvey
Creek, each representing a large non-pottery village. The
potsherds are almost entirely sand tempered and are very
rare. On the other hand, large, heavy projectile points

ArchaeoIog~.caI Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir

65

(Ellis Stemmed, Bosque Stemmed and Sterrett Stemmed)
manos, metates, scrapers, etc., recovered are almost all of
early types. Apparently a pre-pottery culture is represented here, or at least a very early pottery culture.
41-42D5-2" and 3~ are two related sites on Harvey Creek
representing large, Alto Focus villages with later Bossier
Focus occupation. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered
and of Pease Brushed-Incised, Maddox Band Engr.aved,
Dunkin Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, Harrison
Bayou Incised types. Frankston Focus is also represented
in a minor way here by Poynor Engraved, Bullard Brushed,
Maydelle Incised, and Killough Pinched sherds. The landowner reports that during a heavy flood here some years
ago 25 or 30 whole vessels were washed out of this site. A
metate, an abrader, several scrapers, and several Perdiz
Pointed Stemmed arrow points were also found here.
41-42D5-14 is a small, indeterminate campsite on Harvey
Creek. Bone tempered sherds were found.

Plate 6
Sites

of

the

Me’Gee

Ben

Reser\,oir

~.rea.

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

41-42D4-1 and 11 are small, indeterminate campsites on the
south side of the Angelina River.

Probably Alto Focus is

represented here.
41-42D4-3 is a small, Frankston Focus campsite on the
Angelina River.

Clay tempered sherds of Bullard Brushed

ware were found here.
41-42D4-2,9,10, and 12 are small, in~teterminate campsites
on the Angelina River.
41-42D4-13" and 14" may be large, artificial mound sites
within the floodplain of the north side of the Angelina River.
Here, on otherwise level terrain and separated from the
foothills, are two large, elliptical knolls or "mounds." Each
is around 70 feet high and 500 feet in diameter with a terrace about half way up the sides of each.
reported from here, but none were found.

Artifacts are
Only extensive

test trenching will determine whether or not these are artificial mounds.
41-42D1-4 is a small, Frankston Focus village site on the
Angelina River. Pottery is dominantly bone tempered and
of Bu!lard Brushed type.
41-42D1-2" and 3 are non-pottery village sites on the north
side of the Angelina River. Artifacts recovered here are
Gary Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, Bosque Stemmed, and Sterrett Stemmed dart points, scrapers, a pitted stone, and a
drill.
41-42D1-1 is a small, non-pottery site on the west side of
the Attoyac River. Artifacts found were crude and indeterminate in type.
41-42D2-2" is a small, Bossier Focus campsite on the upper
Attoyac River. Pottery is dominantly sand tempered yet
Pease Brushed-Incised and Maddox Band Engraved sherds
were identified. Also 3 Marksville Incised sherds were
found here.

Archaeological Survey oS McGee Bend Reservoir

67

41-42D2-1~ is a small, historic, Allen Focus site on the
upper Attoyac River. Bone tempered pottery is dominant
here and Patton Engraved sherds were identified.
41-42D2-3 is a small, Alto Focus village site on the upper
Attoyac River. A later Bossier Focus occupation .is apparent. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Pease
Brushed-Incised, Maddox Band Engraved, Dunkin Incised
and Davis Incised wares.
41-42D2-4,6,7,13,14, and 15~ are small, indeterminate campsites on the Attoyac River.
41-42D2-12" is a large, Alto Focus village site on Attoyac
River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of plain,
Dunkin Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised and Weches
Fingernail Impressed types. Trade sherds are of Harrison
Bayou Incised type. Scrapers, large blades, Ellis Stemmed,
Bosque Stemmed dart points, pitted and unpitted manos
and an abrader were also found. A short, broad, fluted
point was also found here that is not identifiable with any
of the "early man types" but may be similar to the San
Patrice point of northern Louisiana.,°
41-42D2-10" and 11~ are two components of a single, large,
Alto and Bossier Focus village site near the Attoyac River.
The former is the occupationa! area; the latter is probably
the agricultural area. Evidence of pre-white field clearing
is apparent here. In the occupational area, pottery is dominantly clay tempered, and Dunkin Incised, Harrison Bayou
Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised and a plain ware were identified.
41-42D2-8 and 9 are small, Alto Focus campsites on the
Attoyac River. The few identifiable sherds are of Dunkin
Incised type.
41-42D5-17" is a large, Alto and Bossier Focus village site
on the Attoyac River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and Dunkin Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised, Harrison
Bayou Incised, plain, Maddox Band Engraved, Pennington

10 Webb.

C.

H.,

1946.

68

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Punctate-Incised, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised and Taylor
Engraved wares were identified. Pitted and unpitted manos,
scrapers, Ellis Stemmed, Bosque Stemmed and Sterrett
Stemmed triangular dart points, a polished celt and a hammerstone were also found.
41-42D5-15~ is a large, Alto Focus village site on the Attoyac River. Very little material was present on the surface,
but a large amount of material was recovered from a test
pit. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and Pennington
Punctate-Incised, Davis Incised and plain wares were identified. Scrapers and an abrader were also found.
41-42D5-16 is a small, indeterminate campsite on the
Attoyac River.
41-42D4-8" is a large village site on the east bank of the
Attoyac River 3 miles north of the junction of that river
with the Angelina. Informants state that an "old Indian
trail" from Louisiana to central Texas crossed the Attoyac
near this site, and it is very possible that this was the crossing used by the Spanish under Moscoso in 1542." Pottery
is dominantly clay tempered and Dunkin Incised, plain, Harrison Bayou Incised, Maddox Band Engraved, and Pease
Brushed-Incised wares were identified. Unpitted manos,
scrapers, large blades and several dart points were also
found. Alto Focus occupation is represented here with a
later occupation by Bossier Focus peoples.
Summary and Conclusions
The present archaeological survey of McGee Bend Reservoir has provided only a tantalizing glimpse of what is to
be found in this area by further work and intensive excavation at selected sites. This excavation has been recommended and plans are now under way for securing the
means of accomplishing it. In summary several interesting
points may be made.
The historic Indian cultures of this region are a part of
the Southeastern Culture Province and are largely ascribed
I1 Swanton, J, R.,

1946, pp.

57-59.

Archaeological Survey o~. McGee Bend Reservoir

69

to the Hasinai groups. The Eyish, Nacogdoches, Nacau,
Nasoni, Anadarko, Nacachau, Naconish, Hainai, Nacono,
Nechaui, and Nabedachi tribes are reported to have inhabited the area circa 1650. Most of these groups were located
just slightly to the north and west of the McGee Bend area
but still within the general vicinity. The Eyish were reportedly living within the reservoir area from 1542 to 1801,
and concentrated on the Ayish Bayou. Early records state
that they differed considerably from the other Hasinai tribes.
The Cherokee are reported to have been in the area from
1828-1839.12
The archaeological results of this survey show occupation
of this area by at least five separate cultural groups. There
is indication of a non-l~ottery (if not a truly pre-pottery)
focus in at least 8 sites. The Gibson Aspect of early pottery
cultures is represented in 34 sites of Alto Focus affiliation.
In these sites Dunkin Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised,
Davis Incised, Weches Fingernail Impressed, Holly FineEngraved, Hickory Fine-Engraved and Crockett CurvilinearIncised wares occurred. The Fulton Aspect of later pottery
cultures is represented in 22 sites of Bossier and Frankston
Foci affiliation. The Bossier Focus is indicated in 15 of
these by Pease Brushed-Incised, Maddox Band Engraved,
Belcher Ridged, and Taylor Engraved wares. Frankston
Focus is indicated in !0 sites by Bullard Brushed, Ki!lough
Pinched, Poynor Engraved, and Maydelle Incised wares.
The historic Allen Focus is represented by Patton Engraved
ware in 3 sites, only one of which provided more than one
sherd. None of these loci are cor~centrated in any particular geographic section of the McGee Bend Reservoir area.
Combinations of the above loci occurred in at least 12
sites. Alto and Bossier Foci are indicated in the same site
in 9 instances; Alto and Frankston Foci in 1; Alto, Bossier
and Frankston Foci in 2; Alto Focus alone in 17; Bossier
Focus alone in 4; Frankston Focus alone in 2; Allen Focus
alone in 1. Eight appear to be non-pottery sites, and 36 are
of indeterminate cultural affiliation. Trade sherds of Har12 Swantono

~’.

R.,

1946.

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

rlson Bayou Incised, Bowles Creek Plain, Wilkinson Punctate and Marksvi!le Incised wares occurred in 12 of the above
sites.

Five of these are of Alto Focus; 3 are of Alto-Bossier

Foci; 2 are of Alto-Frankston Foci; and 2 are of Alto BossierFrankston Foci. The sites in which Frankston Focus and
Allen Focus materials are represented produced only a small
number of definitive sherds. They probably do not represent
occupations by these people, but rather indicate trade with
them.
The cultural affiliations implied are largely determinable
on the basis of potsherd types. In the entire survey no artifacts of bone, shell or other materials than stone and pottery
were recovered. No influence from the Gulf Coast was
found but extensive influence from the pottery cultures of
Louisiana, including Marksville, appeared. Some influence
from Central Texas was found in the lithic artifacts made
of gray flint from that area. The dominant pottery type,
both in absolute numbers and in representation in numbers
of sites is Dunkin Incised ware. Thig and other Alto Focu~
wares comprise over half of all identifiable sherds. Bossier
Focus wares are second in quantitative significance. Other
wares are only present in very minor percentages. A plain
type of pottery is found in a large number of sites and is
here called "sand tempered." It is actually composed almost
entirely of sand with only enough clay included to hold the
sand together. This is considered to be a very old type of
pottery and at the Davis Site (Alto Mound) was found only
in the very earliest levels:,3 This type also occurs in some
of the earliest pottery sites throughout the southeast. It is
not presumed that this implies influence from any specific
areas of the southeast, but rather is a widespread type of
very early pottery and is included in this western extremity
of the Southeastern Culture Province.
The cultural sequences, as shown by this survey, indicate
that the area of the McGee Bend Reservoir was occupied at
some time or times by a non-pottery people; that the major
13 Newell, If. P. and Krieger, A. D., The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County,
East Texas. Manuscript in preparation.

Archaeological Survey o$ McGee Bend Reservoir

occupation of the area was by Alto Focus peoples between
the llth and 14th centuries A. D.; and that later some of
these same villages, as well as some new ones, were occupied
by Bossier Focus peoples between the 14th and 16th centuries A.D. The latter were in contact with the Frankston
Focus people and also, to a minor extent, with other group~
to the east. This latter contact to the east. may have existed
also in Alto Focus times. Whether Alto Focus developed
into Bossier Focus or was replaced by it is a matter for
speculation. At least it can be said that a very’large number
of Alto Focus sites also show Bossier Focus occupation and
there is certainly some implication of gradual development
from the one to the other.
REFERENCES CITED
Cory, V. L.; Parks, H. B., et al.
1937. Catalogue of the Flora of the State of Texas. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin 550.
Ford, J. A. and Willey, Gordon R.
1941. An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern
United States. American Anthropologist, Vol. 43.
Ford, J. A. and Willey, Gordon.
1945. The Tchefuncte Culture, on Early Occupation of the
Lower Mississippi Valley. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology, No. 2.
Krieger, A. D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publication, No. 4640.
Martin, P. S., Quimby, G. I., Collier, D.
1947. Indians Before Columbus.
Press, Chicago, Illinois.

University of Chicago

Newe]l, H. P., and Krieger, A. D.
N. D. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, East
Texas. Manuscript in preparation.

72

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Parks, H. B., Cory, V. L., et al.
1938. Biological Survey o] the East Texas Big Thicket
Area. Huntsville, Texas.
Pearce, J. E.
1932. The Arch.aeoIogy o~ East Texas.
pologist, N. S., Vol. 34.

American Anthro-

Quimby, Geo. I., Jr.
1942. The Natchezan Culture Type. American Antiquity,
Vol. 7, No. 3.
Raiz, Erwin.
1939. Map o~ the Land]orms of the United States. Wallace,
Atwood, Ginn & Co.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, No. 17, Globe, Arizona.
Smith, Victor J.
1936. The Pottery Horizons o] Texas. Bulletin, T.A.P.S.,
Vol. 8.
Stephenson, R.L.
1947. Archaeological Survey o~ Whitney Basin. Bulletin
of T.A.P.S., Vol. 18.
Swanton, John R.
1946. The Indians o] ~he Southeastern United S$ates. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 137.
Walker, W.M.
1935. A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, La. SmithsonJan Misc. Co!lections, Vol. 94, No. 14.
Walker, Winslow M.
1936. The Troyville Mounds, Catahoula Parish, La. B.A.E.
Bulletin 113.

Archaeological Survey o] McGee Bend Reservoir

73

Webb, C. H. and Monroe, Dodd, Jr.
1938. Further Excavation oS the Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida Culture. Bulletin, T.A.P.S.,
Vol. 11.
Webb, C. H.
1941. Pottery Types from the Belcher Mound Site. Bulletin, T.A.P.S., Vol. 13.
Webb, C. H.
1944. Stone Vessels ]rom a Northeast Louisiana Site.
American Antiquity, Vol. IX, No. 4.
Webb, C. H.
1945. A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.
Bulletin, T.A.P.S., Vol. 16.
Webb,
1946.

C. H.
Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts ]rom
Northwest Louisiana. Bulletin, T.A.P.S., Vol. 17.

Webb, C. H.
1948. Evidences o] Pre-Pottery Cultures in Louisian~.
American Antiquity, Vol. XIII, No. 3.
White, T. E.
N. D. Summary Report o] the Paleontological Resources
o~ the Texas Region. Unpublished report of the
River Basin Surveys.

"/4

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

AN ARCHAF.OLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCI~.

IN NORTHERN COAHUILA
HERBERT C. TAYLOR, JR.

If one places the point of a compass at the confluence of
the Pecos and Rio Grande, then sets a thirty mile radius
upon the instrument and draws a circle, one has achieved a
crude circumscription of the known boundaries of the Pecos
River Focus pictograph area. Deform the circle to the eastward by blunting it to follow the west bank of the Devil’s
River and place a question mark in all that circumscribed
area which lies south of the Rio Grande.,
These are
roughly, the accepted limits of the pictograph area of the
Pecos River Focus~ and it is with the question mark that this
paper is concerned.
A coherent discussion of this archaeological reconnaissance cannot, however, be developed without a brief statement concerning the geography, chronology, and cultural
characteristics of the Pecos River Focus, per se.
The area about the mouth of the Pecos is notably arid and
is slashed by deep arroyos eroding the Cretaceous limestone
which is the underlying rock formation. The walls of these
canyons are spotted with overhanging rocks or indentations
which form rock shelters--the homes of the Pecos River
Cave Dwellers.
From various indications it is believed that this culture
flourished during the period which immediately preceded
1 Dr. Walt Taylor of the Smithsonian Institution has done extensive work on
the ~outhern periphery of the area and although he has not yet published on th~s
reconnaissance, conversations reveal the possibility that the Pccos River Focus
extends at least sixty miles south of the Rio Grande.
2 E. B. Sayle~ originally gave the name Peeos River Cave Dweller to this culture in his An Archaeological Survey of Texas.
The Witte Museum customarily
refers to the culture as Basket Maker in publications.
The University of Texas

has employed the term Peeos River Focus which will be adhered to in this paper.
The limits of the Pecos River Focus Pictograph Area are, north of the Rio
Grande, the equivalent of Sayles’ Pecos River Cave Dweller area. However, Kelley,
Campbell and Lehmer in their The Association of Archaeological Materials Of Geological Deposits in the Big Bead Region of Texas have established the Peco~ River
culture far into the Big Bend.
:No diagnostic pictographs of this Focus are found,
however, beyond Sayle~’ delineation, except the are~ with which this paper is

concerned.

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila

75

the Kokernot, a wet period dated at ~from 800-1000 years
from the present.3 This would place the terminal chronological date at about 1000 years from the present.
Both climatically and topographically the land was
perhaps a little less forbidding. The annual precipitation
would seem to have been higher lending a more verdant
aspect to the area, and the erosion cycle had not advanced
quite so far, although, certainly there was no significant
difference in the major geographical features.
The Pecos River Focus was first defined as a cultural
entity by E. B. Sayles in his monumental Survey of Texas
Archaeology." He classified this culture as an early food-

PLATE
Numerals indicate sites as follows:
1, La Elephante; 2, San Martin;"
3, E1 Seis Pictograph Site; 4, E1 Seis Rock Shelter; 5, La ~kngelita Rock
Shelter; 6, CoahuilanoShumla Rock Shelter; 7, Coahuilan Pecos
huilan Pecos II; 9, Burnt Rock .~Iound; 10, Santa l~osa Rock Shelter.

3 Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell and Donald J. Lehmer, The Association,
of Archeological Materials and Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas,.
Sul Ross State Teachers College Bulletin, VoL XXI, No. 3, Sept~ 1940. PIate XIX.
4 Sayles, E. B., An Areheologlcal Survey of Texas, Medallion Papers, GII~
Pueblo, Globe, Arizona, May 1936.

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gathering group and defined its geographical limitations
approximately as those given earlier in this paper. Sayles
postulated the continuation of the Pecos River tradition into
the late pre-historic period which he refers to as food-gathering and early agricultural groups.~ He recorded several
distinctive or diagnostic characteristics for this culture.
Among these were: flake knives retouched along a straight
or slightly curving edge; projectile points which were thin
with fine points, long stemmed, squareshouldered, and broad
bladed; ornaments of snail shell, conch and fresh water
gorgers, and olivella shells; and painted pebbles.
Site types of the Pecos Cave Dweller, according to Sayles~
and J. Charles Kelley,7 were of two types: rock shelters
and sotol pits.o
Dr. J. Charles Kelley of the University of Texas lists
several other diagnostic criteria: square or round toed
sandals, two rod and a bundle coiled basketry. LangtryStemmed projectile points,° and as a negative characteristic,
he stipulates lack of agriculture.
Perhaps the most distinctive trait of the Pecos River
Focus are the remarkable pictographs. These cannot be
mentioned under the heading of diagnostic criteria because
they have a much smaller distribution than does the Focus
proper.
Thus it may be seen that we are dealing probably with a
discrete group of ancient gathering horizon peoples who
.5 It must be remembered that Mr. Sayles was

conductiug au

initial

survey

of

Texas archeology as he has frequently emphasized. Present day evidence would
seem to indicate that the Pecos River Focus came to an end at the beginning of
the Korkernot and that there is no evidence of agriculture in this culture.
60p. cir., Sayles. Table 6.
70p. cir., Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, 1~. 24.
8 So-ca!led "sotol pits" are found both in the caves and at considerable distances
from them.
Mr. Arnold D. Peterson and the writer trenched one near Langtry
in June of this year.
It eontained quantities ~f amaIt shell; no bone or fiber.
There were no artifacts. In this connection it might be mentioned that Mera (Mera,
H. P., Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern ]New Mexico, Memoirs of the
American Anthropologica! As.,~ociat]on, Vol. 51, 1938, pp. 15-17) xvho excavated
mounds of marked similarity in southeastern New Mexic~ cast doubt upon the apt~
n~ of the tr~litional term "s~tol pit3’" and employs the te~n midden-circle~.
Because, in the area under discussion, no ~rtlfa~t~ have b~en found in thes~
"so~ol pits’~ and because amateur archaeologists with great experience in the are~:
such as Guy and Jack Skiles and E. L. Rhodes state that these pits are usually
artifact sterile, the writer does not believe it possible 1o l)<~tulate, at this time.
the oulture to which these mounds belong.
90p. cir., Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, pp. 24, 25.

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern CoahuiIa

77

existed in the general area of the mouth of the Pecos and
to an indeterminate distance southeast and northwest along
the Rio Grande.
All that was known of the Pecos River Focus lay in the
area north of the Rio Grande. It seemed probable that the
culture extended into Mexico. To determine the veracity
of this presumption, and if true, to determine the extent of
the Pecos River Focus south of the Rio Grande, and in hope
of obtaining suitable sites for excavation and study at some
future date, the writer carried on an archaeological reconnaissance in northern Coahuila in August of this year.,o
Headquarters for the reconnaissance was established at
the Hacienda Santa Rosa. Rancho Santa Rosa extends from
a point east and south of the mouth of the Pecos to some
distance beyond Langtry on the Mexican side and includes
nearly all of the area covered in the reconnaissance.
A crow would find the distance between these two points
about twenty miles, but following the tortuous writhings
of the Rio Grande makes the distance nearly fifty miles.
The country is drained by three major arroyos, La Zorra
enters the Rio Grande about twenty miles east of the mouth
of the Pecos; approximately halfa mile further west is
Arroyo E1 Caballo. Arroyo E1 Salado joins the Rio Grande
about eighteen miles west of the mouth of the Pecos. Approximately in the center of this area lies a smaller, but
relatively large, canyon, La Parida, which enters the river
just east of the Pecos. In addition the country is characteristically criss-crossed with smaller arroyos and washes. In
the main, the sites described herein, it will be noted, lie on
10 To say that the author carried on an archaeological reconnaissance carries
an inaccurate c~nnottion, for the rev~nnaissa~ce is largely the work of many others.
What the author knows of trans-Pecos archaeoiogT is but a reflectSon of knowledge of J. Charte~ Kelley of the University of Texas; it i~ his research0 his ideas.
his work~ that is largely recorded here, The author is under obligation for aid in
field ~’ork to .A.D. Peterson, s~udent, Pennsylvania State College and William
lqe~ms, student, University of Texas, Miss Ruby Oncken, A~slstant Curator of the
Museum of Anthropolo~T, University of Texas, for aid in research, and to Mrs.
Frank L. Stevens, for steongraphia work. The field work was financed by Mr.
and Mrs. H. C. Taylor, of Houston, Texas, Primary thanks for whatever success
this reconnaissance may have enjoyed is due to Don Valieriano Diego and his sons
of Hacienda Sauta Rosa, Coahuila.
Raw~n Diego-Riza, in particular, wa~ the
author’s frequent companion in the field and a quite capable guide with an intelligent interest in archaeology.
Every courtesy and consideration was shown
the writer durin~ his stay on their Ha¢ien.da.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological SocieSy

~r near the Rio Grande.

However, the region was covered

to a maximum of twelve miles inland.

Depending upon

the terrain, reconnaissance was done by truck, horseback,
and foot.

The map is not entirely accurate and in the case

of one site, La Elephante, it may be off more than a mile.
Rather than attempt a synthesis of the information
gleaned, it will be better to describe the sites briefly as they
are recorded in the field notes, present a short summary,
and to postpone conclusions until further study and some
excavation may be done in the area.
San Martin
San Martin is a relatively small and short arroyo which
joins the Rio Grande at a point approximately five miles
downstream from Langtry.

Up the canyon, about five

hundred yards south of this confluence there is a stream cut
back forming a rock overhang along the western wall of
the arroyo.,, For about one hundred and twenty feet along
this natural gallery the wall is covered with paintings,
most of which seem to be of the Pecos River style.,2 Some
of the paintings along the roof of the overhang seem to be
more recent in origin. In contrast to the polychrome, highly
conventionalized paintings of the presumed Pecos Focus
pictographs, these latter are crude, naturalistic representations of men invariably done in bright red.
At this site the Pecos style paintings are done in bright
and dark red and black. (The writer does not wish to leave
the unequivocal impression that all polychrome paintings at
this site are, per se, Pecos Focus. His knowledge of the subject is too slight to allow such an assertion and, in his
.opinion, some of the black on bright red pictographs seem
open to question as to origin. Spalling has partially obliterated some of the paintings and doubtless has removed
others).
] l See Plate
12 See Plate

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila

79

La EIephan~e
Some two miles upstream at La Elephante there is another
arroyo which contains two galleries of paintings similar to
those of San Martin. Perhaps it should be pointed out
here that La Elephante is not actually an arroyo, but a series
of washes fronting upon the t~io Grande, which to someone’s
fertile imagination suggested a pachyderm and, thus, garnered the site’s distinctive name.
Here again, the paintings are mostly Pecos River Focus
polychrome,’3 but several paintings are bright red, in some
cases superimposed upon the polychrome paintings, and
clearly more recent in origin. In this case these latter paintings would seem to extend into the historic period. (For
example, one of these paintings portrays a woman wearing
a skirt and balancing a pot upon her head. Occasionally, in
the Pecos River area one finds painting depicting bows and

~LATE
A.
B.
C.
:D.
E.
1~.
G.

Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph

from
fcom
from
from
from
from
from

13 Sce Plate 8.

8

San A~[artin (probably Pecos River Focus).
San :Martin (probably Pecos River Focus).
Coahuilan-Shumla (probably recent),
La Elephante (probably recent).
Coahuilan-Shumta (probably Pecos River Focus).
La ]~31ephante (probably Pecos River Focus).
:El Seis Pictograph Site (probably Pecos River Focus)

80

Texas ArchaeoIogical and Paleontological Society

arrows, crosses and saints, always crudely done in bright
red).
There were no midden deposits or burnt rock mounds in
the area and only a few flint chips and nodules were in
evidence.
El Seis Pictopraph Site

About one and three-quarter miles north of Et Seis windmill and about six miles southwest of the San Martin site,
is a pictograph site which is very similar to that at San
Martin. On the east bank, in a relatively small, nameless
canyon, is a rock-overhang on which are paintings for a
distance of about 100 feet.
The paintings are well-nigh obliterated but enough may
be seen to assure that they are indubitably Pecos River
Focus in origin.
All of those which are still discernible depict Pecos conventionaliz~d men.
On the wal! of a ledge some twenty feet up the arroyo and
about twentyfive feet above the bed of the stream are faint
remnants of paintings. Their depictions are no longer
apparent.
El Seis Rock Shelter
About one and three-quarter miles north of E1 Seis pictograph site and approximately one-third of a mile south of
the Rio Grande immediately to the west of Shumla Bend is
E1 Seis Rock Shelter (a name arbitrarily bestowed). This
shelter is narrow in depth extending for perhaps seventy
feet just under the rim of the canyon wall. The canyon, a
small and nameless arroyo, proceeds northeast into the Rio
Grande.
The shelter measures less than ten feet from floor to roof
at its center and is less than the height of a man at either
end. The walls are heavily fire-blackened at both ends and
sporadically elsewhere in the shelter. There is a midden
deposit of indeterminate depth on the floor of the cave.

A?~ Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahu~Ia

Some chipped flint and a few side scrapers were found on~
the precipitous talus slope immediately beyond the tip of
the cave.
La Angelita Rock Shelter
La Angelita is located about two miles southeast of the
town of Shumla, Texas, and about one-half a mile northnortheast of E1 Seis pictograph site. It fronts directly upon
the Rio Grande about 120 feet above the stream.
The shelter is long bdt extremely shallow, having an
entrance approximately 120 feet wide and averaging perhaps
twenty feet in depth. There are no pictographs, but spalling
is proceeding apace and there well may have been in some
places. Fire-blacking is present throughout the cave wherever recent spalling is not apparent.
Surface finds included two Paisano indented base, one
Langtry Stemmed, one Shumla serrate, one Juno broad base,
and one uncertain (being broken on both base and edge).
Two enormous boulders occupy the central portion of the~
cave. Toward the western end of the cave, at a point where
the limestone has begun to slope upward to form the wall,
there:is a stone shelf and in it are a number of deep, smooth,
rounded holes (a typical one is one and one-third feet deep
with a diameter of approximately eight inches). About
these holes are pitted more than a score of smaller pits.
Coahuilan Shurnla Rock Shelter~4
Coahuilan Shumla Rock Shelter is located on Arroyo Seis
(which has its origin near Santa Rosa windmill six). It is
nearly due south from Shumla, Texas, and about one mile
south of the Rio Grande.
According to Ramon Diego-Riza this cave had numerous
paintings and some smoke-stains. About a year ago brush
was piled in the cave and fired in order to kill parasites
which were infesting the sheep that lived, seasonally, in the
14 .The term "Coahuilan" is here used in order to differentiate this site from
Shumla Cave on the American side,
A similar terminology is employed in
reference to the Pe~ sites.

82

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

shelter. In the process nearly all paintings were obliterated.
Surviving are two red ochre paintings of "cowheads.’’’~
A remnant of a painting resembling one found in Seminole
Canyon, near Comstock, is also discernible. Jackson em.ployed the term sun-brusts to describe this type of painting.,~
Round blobs with lines depending downward and with a
broad, intersecting, wavy, line near the bottom comprise the
painting.
This cave had been slightly pitted by haphazard digging,
Autographs of several individuals and some crude Western
European drawings were present on the walls.
Near the western entrance there was a patch of glossy
limestone with several indentations or scratches on the
surface.
Coahuilan Shumla rock shelter has a huge midden deposit
and a steep talus slope. It measures about forty feet across
the entrance, tapering toward the rear. It is about one
hundred feet in depth.
Coahuilan Pecos I Rock Shelter
There are two rock shelters near the confluence of the
Pecos and Rio Grande.
Coahuilan Pecos I is the smaller and is located almost
immediately south of the mouth~7 of the Pecos, high on the
south bank of the Rio Grande. The shelter is approximately
forty feet across the mouth and possibly fifty feet in depth
at the center.
Chipped flint, pestles and matting are scattered about the
surface of the midden, which is evidently rather deep.
Projectile points found are tentatively identified as variant
Shumla serrate. Deep rounded mortar holes, such as those
described for La Angelita are found at the west front.
Metates are located at the east rear.

15 See Plat~ ,~.

16 Jackson, A. T.,
ve~i~ of T~s.
17 See Plate 7.

Field

Note~, Fate Bell Rock

Shelter

{Unpublished). Uni-

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern CoahuiIa

83

CoahuiIan Pecos II

This rock shelter is located some four hundred yards
stream from the previously described site. Coahulan Pecos II
is high on a canyon wall with an extremely precipitous talus
slope.
The cave measures some three hundred feet across at
the mouth but only twenty-five feet in depth at the maximum. There is a large and apparently deep midden deposit.
At the west entrance are some fifty deep rounded mortar
holes, with one at the front center. At the eastern and near
the front there are numerous metates in the cave wall and,
here, the stone is worn or polished to gleaming, white, slippery smoothness. In this area are numerous grooves or
indentations such as described for Coahuilan-Shumla Rock
Shelter.,8 The only projectile point found was LangtryStemmed.
La Parida Mound Site

A glance at the map will show that La Parida Arroyo is
formed by two intersecting canyons some six miles below
the Rio Grande. At this juncture there was a burnt rock
mound which has been washed considerably, but would
seem to have been of the same type as the "sotol pits" found
in the Pecos River area. There were no artifacts and no
chipped flint in the vicinity of the mound. Burnt rock was
scattered for a considerable distance downstream.
Santa Rosa Rock Shelter
Located on the eastern branch of La Parida Canyon some
seven miles below its confluence with the Rio Grande is
Hacienda Santa Rosa, headquarters for the Santa Rosa
rancho. On the opposite and eastern canyon wall is a small
rock shelter which has suffered enormous rock falls almost

18 In

converr~atlon

Dr.

W~It

Taylor

described

similar

glossy,

~cratched

l~atches of ~ve w~ in ~k shel~ ~e sixty mil~ ~ the ~th and w~

~.

Taylor s~ that the nature of ~e inclusions s~g~ that th~ we~ not
used for s~pening a~ifac~ but that he ~uld not venture an opinion ~ ~ the
~nifi~n~ of ~ phenomen~
Dr. Ke]l~ s~ ~at he h~ found similar
in~n~ gl~ $~ne pat~ ~ve the Rio G~nde in t~ Big Bend A~a and
that he has not de~in~ ~ u~e.

84

. Texas Archeological and Paleon~ologtcal Society

obliterating the shelter. On one spalled piece of limestone
in the rear of what remains of the shelter were found two
parallel bars of red ochre paint.

Some chipped flint was

found but no artifacts were present on the talus slope beyond
the lip of the shelter.
Summary
Pecos River Focus sites are to be found south of the Rio
Grande near the mouth of the Pecos in virtually the same
locations and numbers in which they occur north of the
border. As on the American side, typically the sites are
located on or near the Rio Grande. In this, the Pecos River
Focus pictograph area differs from the culture per se. Pecos
sites are to be found well into the interior of the Big Bend
but no Pecos Focus pictograph site was located at a greater
distance than ten miles from the Rio Grande or from the
Pecos.te
Projectile points and other flint artifacts found in surface
collections=o indicate Pecos River Focus and possibly Chisos
Focus2, cultures.
Pictographs are typically of two discrete types: Pecos
River Focus and a distinctly cruder and more recent type of
pictograph which has been tied to no culture.
19 It should be noted here that no Pevoe Foetm Pi~graph Site i~ known to
exist more than ten miles from e|ther the Peco~ or the R~o Grande
20 The writer did not have permi~lon ~m the Mexic~m government to
21 In conve~-sation Dr. Kelley ha~ indicated thgt he regard~ the Pai~ano
indented ba~e. not as a cultural intrusive from the Cht~ Focus in thi~
but rather ~ a typical point of the Pec~ Focu~
Wh~her there i~ a chronological
overlsp and tht~ material culture borrowing between these loci,or wht~her
River Focus points have a cultural continuum into the Chi~e~ Focu~ period, is not
known.
In any ease projectile points commonly r~g~rded ~ diagnostic of
Chi~o~ Focus occur virtually everywhere in Peco~ Focus $ite~ in a~octatlon with
the Langtryostemmed projectile points.

PLATE

,k. Western edge ,)f entrance to Coahuilan Pecos II, Ramon Dlego-Rlz~ on
ledge.
Note U. S. :Highway No. 90
:B. Coahuilan :Pecos I from interior of cave.
in upper right hand corner of photograph.

C. View Coahullan-Shumla entrance.
D. From left to right, bottom row, Lungtry-Stemmed, W’ariant ShumlaStemmed, uncertain, Sh~mla-Stemmed.
:b’Tom left to right, top row. L~ngtry-Stemmed, Ararlant Shumla-Stemmed.
Juno Broad Ba~e, and Palsano Indented Base.

Plate 9

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila

87

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell and Donald J. Lehmer:
The Association of Archaeological .Materials and Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region oS Texas, Su]
Ross State Teachers College Bulletin, Vol. XXI, no. 3,
Sept. 1940.
Jackson, A. T.; Field Notes, Fate Bell Rock Shelter (Unpublished), University of Texas.
Mera, I-I. P.:Reconn~tissance and Excavation in Southeastern
New Me~ico, ]Ylemoirs of the American Anthropologica!
Association, Vol. 51, 1938.
Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson: A Prehistoric Rock Shelter
in VaI Verde County, Texas, The University of Texas,
Anthropological .Papers, Vol. I, no. 3, July 1933.
Sayles, E. B.: An Archaeologica~ Survey of Texas, Medallion
Papers, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona, Ma.~ 1935.

88

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

VERTEBRATE PALEONTOLOGICAL FIELD
TECHNIOUE AND ITS APPLICATION TO
ARCHAEOLOGICAL COLLECTING
WANN LANGSTON~

JR.

Introduction

It has frequently occurred to the writer during cursory
inspections of archaeological collections in various North
American museums that certain collecting practices developed in the field of vertebrate paleontology might be
applied advantageously to various phases of archaeological
collecting. That the preservation of in situ relationships in
certain specimens, both archaeological and paleontological,
is of paramount importance cannot be questioned, but such
associations are al! too frequently destroyed by improper
collecting methods. In areas where great interest in the
association of human artifacts with fossil mammal bones
obtains it is most desirable that any such associations be
preserved intact and undisturbed. Although field notes and
photographs play an integral part in presenting evidence of
such associations their value as substantiating media may
decrease with time. Actual preservation to the contrary
can seldom be challenged.

The field methods outlined beloxv have been long established in the field of vertebrate paleontology and have
proved invaluable by permitting the removal of very large
and fragile skeletons and masses of bones in such a manner
that all anatomical evidence afforded by the natural association of the various skeletal elements has been preserved
intact. Any skeleton can be removed from its place of
burial and transported to the laboratory in exactly the same
condition in which it was found.
Editor’s Note: Professienat ~Lrchr~eologists may find little ne~v in Mr. Langston’s
ar~cle, bug m~y sma~u~ will find it a u~ful manual for field work.
In.much
~ one of the b~ic ~sons for the exis~nce of the Texas Arch~logi~! nnd
Pal~n~logi~ ~i~y is ~ encou~ge the ~rious ~a~ur and fu~ish ~n outlet
for his re~, we feel that this paper is a vMusble cont.~bu~on.

Vertebrate Paleonfo!ogical Field Technique

89

It must be remembered that these are the methods of the
paleontologist developed by him to meet problems peculiar
to his particular science.

It appears probable, however, that

with certain modifications, best suggested by the archaeologist himself, this technique can be adapted to the collecting
of human skeletal materia! and associated artifacts as wel!
as to fossil mammal remains which may be encountered
during the excavation of archaeological sites. It is conceivable that they may even be employed satisfactorily in
collecting badly broken and crushed pottery and fragmentary basketry. They have already been utilized in
modified forms in the removal of ancient friezes and wall
sculpture.
Tools and Equipment
A complete listing of tools and equipment required in
archaeological collecting is scarcely necessary in the present
paper. However, certain materials the uses of which will
be described below are listed briefly in the following paragraphs.
Shellac: A good grade of white or clear shellac should be
used (orange or brown varieties will result in an undesirable
discoloration of the specimen). A fifty percent dilution with
alcohol is nearly always necessary and further thinning may
prove desirable. A thick coating of undiluted shellac will
form a gummy surface over the specimen which may prove
difficult to remove when preparation is begun.
Glue: Various types of binding agents may be used in
addition to shellac. For paleontological purposes a cellulose
acetate glue or commercial "Duco" has proved most satisfactory. This can be made by dissolving clear celluloid in
acetone until the desired thickness is obtained. Other binding agents such as "Ambroid" and "Alvar" may also be used,
but furniture glue and other water-soluble cements should
never be employed.
Paper: Any type of tissue paper with good absorbent
qualities may be used, but a rough-surfaced toilet tissue is
most easily applied. Rice paper has been employed for

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

many years, but it is now obtainable only with difficulty and
at some expense. Paper towels are too thick and stiff, and
facial tissues are too fragile for most work. Either should
be used only as a last resort.
Plaster: Plaster of Paris is an indispensable agent in collecting. Moulding plaster No. I is an excellent quick-setting
utility product which can be obtained readily and at little
expense at almost any lumber yard or hardware store. There
is no necessity to purchase expensive dental plaster Or other
specially refined products. Great care must be taken in
the handling of plaster of Paris. It should never be exposed
to water and even moisture in the air may reduce the "setting" ability once the plaster has been opened. Before using
each broken or old sack, the plaster should be tested for rapid
setting qualities. Dead plaster when used in a cast must
be removed before applying another jacket and such treatment cannot be expected to have a favorable effect on the
specimen.
Burlap: Burlap bags may be obtained from any feed store
or from local farmers at moderate expense. Potato sacks
should be of the coarse or loose-woven variety and patched
bags are usuall~r as satisfactory as new sacks.
Water: Sufficient water should be available to mix the
required amount of plaster and to soak the burlap bandages
before application.
Buckets: At least two galvanized pails should be carried;
one for mixing plaster and one for soaking the burlap. The
plaster bucket should be cleaned after each mixing since
hardened plaster has a tendency to destroy the setting ability
of later batches.
Excavation
The various excavation methods employed by the archaeologist have been long established and it is assumed that the
reader is familiar with them. Paleontological techinque,
however, will be discussed in some detail for the benefit of
those who have had little experience in this type of co!]ecting.

Vertebrate Paleontological Field Technique

91

The first stage in collecting a vertebrate:skeleton is one
with which the archaeologist is thoroughly familiar: the
removal of overburden from the specimen.

Heavy tools

(picks, shovels, and even slips and small frenznos)may be
used for this purpose~ but care must be exercised in approaching the level of the specimen. Generally heavy work
should be diseontinued at least six inches above the suspected
position of the bones. From this point small tools (ice picks,
awls, sacking needles, whisk brooms, and paint brushes)
should be used to remove the remaining overburden. The
ever-present tendency toward digging straight down to the
specimen must be avoided and removel of the matrix should
be accomplished by working back from the exposure in a
horizontal rather than in a vertical direction.
In exposing the bones, only enough matrix is removed ~o
permit accurate outlining of the specimen; no attempt should
be made to prepare the specimen in the field. The enclosing
material will serve to hold the broken elements together
and will offer some degree of support and protection to the
specimen during transportation. In no case should the
bones be undermined during this stage in the operations,.
As each new area of bone is exposed it should be carefully
brushed to remove all loose matrix. After br~hing, the
bone is shellacked thoroughly, Brushing-on of the shellac
is not always desirable since the bone may be badly broken
and thoroughly rotten. In such cases the first coat may be
applied by dripping very thin shellac from the end of a brush
or, in extreme instances, by spraying the bone with shellac
or cellulose acetate cement. An ordinary insect spray-gun
wil! prove entirely satisfactory for this purpose. The she]lac should be allowed to soak into the surface of the bone
and application should continue at short intervals until
absorption ceases. A thick outer coating of shellac or glue is
usually undesirable inasmuch as it must be removed during
preparation.
Shellac and "Duco" must never be applied to a moist
surface. Water prevents penetration of the binding agent
and a useless or even harmful coating will accumulate on the

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

bone. Shellac should be permitted to dry thoroughly before
any further work is undertaken in the vicinity of its application.
If the containing matrix is loose and unconsolidated, a
strong tendency toward slumping may be evidenced. In
this eventuality it will be necessary to indurate the matrix
with shellac, but under ordinary circumstances this expedient is not recommended.
When outlining has been completed the specimen should
be photographed and careful notes concerning the mode of
occurrence should be recorded. If the specimen is to be
removed in more than one block each section must be carefully plotted on an excavation chart so that adjacent blocks
may be reassembled in the laboratory.
Blocking Out the SpecLmen
After the upper side of the specimen has been completely
exposed a surrounding trench must be dug in such a way
that the bones will be supported by a pedestal of undisturbed matrix. This trench should be of such proportions
that the excavator may work underneath the pedesta! and
somewhat below the lowest possible level of the bones.
Digging should commence at some distance from the specimen and should be continued toward it with a view toward
reducing the size of the pedestal and of the final block.
PLATE 10
A. View of bone quarry near Agate, Nebraska, illustrating the degree to
which it may be necessary to remove the overburden from a specimen.
The skeleton for which thi~ excavation was made lies near the feet of the
worker.
B. View of mammoth excavation ~fter removal of bones has begun. The
scapula, center foreground, has been cast on the upper surface and is
here shown re.sting upon a pedestal of undisturbed matrix.
A tunnel
hms been cut through the base of the pedestal to permit partial bandagirig
and strengthening of the under side before inverting the block.
Casts
in the upper left background have been turned over and ca~ting of
the underside before inverting the block. Casts In the upper left background have been turned over and casting of the undersides is about
to begin.
C. View of mammoth humerus showing method of trenching and the
destal of undisturbed matrix.
D.
¯ Skull, humerus, and scapulae of mammoth partially exposed and
"
shellacked.
E. View of a large deposit of mammoth bones found near Levelland, Texas.
l~ost of th~ hoses have been exposed and some are blocked out preparatory to casting.

Plate 10

Vertebrate PaleontoZog~cal Field Technique

95

When the entire specimen has been blocked out, serious
consideration should be given to the problem of transportation. Large blocks of bones with their enclosing matrix are
extremely difficult to handle. The majority of such blocks,
howe,~er, can be divided or sectioned into several smaller
pieces. In such an undertaking any apparent areas of weakness are the obvious points for separation. Cutting or breaking a specimen for purposes of separation is not to be desired,
but when necessary, it can be done with a minimum of damage to the specimen. When the areas through which the
block is to be cut have been located~ trenching may proceed
through them thus dividing the original large pedestal into
several smaller ones.
The edges of the pedestals must now be undermined. The
extent to which this is necessary or possible can be determined only through experience, but it should never be
produced so far as to result in caving or slumping of the
bones or upper edges of the block. Undercutting should
begin near the base of the pedestal and proceed upward to
within a shor.t distance of the lowest possible bone level.
Casting
Casting or jacketing should be undertaken as soon as
possible after the completion of the blocking-out process
outlined above. All ne.cessary equipment should be available before this stage is begun.
Bandages must be prepared by cutting burlap bags into
strips of varying~ dimensions. The majority of such bandages will probably, range from six to twelve inches in
length and from four to eight inches in width, but larger or
smaller sizes may be indicated in certain instances. The
strips must be thoroughly dampened befor: ~sing since dry
burlap will tend to remove the moisture from the plaster
thus reducing its setting ability.
In order to prevent the plaster from adhering to the bone
surfaces tissue paper can be applied to all exposed areas.
/k small amount of water may be splashed onto the bones in
order to hold the paper in position during application. If

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

toilet tissue is used it may be rolled onto the exposed surfaces very easily. All paper should be tamped down witha
wet brush in order that any overhangs which may be present
can be detected before the cast is applied. When such overhangs are located they must be eliminated by wadding tissue
paper into them or by filling them with mud. If catches or
overhangs are allowed to go into a cast without proper preventive measures, great difficulty may be experienced in the
removal of the cast in the laboratory. In most specimens
two or three thicknesses of paper will prove adequate, but
greater thicknesses may be used if desired.
In preparing the block to receive the jacket .the entire
pedestal should be moistened. Failure to do this will result
in a poor purchase for the plaster bandages and much inconvenience may result.
Plaster and water must now be mixed thoroughly until
a mixture approaching the consistency of thick cream is
obtained. One or two previously moistened bandages are
dipped into the plaster and manipulated until they become
well impregnated. Generally such a bandage will Contain
far too much plaster, but the excess may be removed by
running the strip between the thumb and index finger.~ The
bandages are applied to the block until the entire upper and
latera! surfaces are completely covered. If the bandages
fail to adhere to the overhang around the edges of the block
they should be held in place or tamped in around it until
setting has begun. It is imperative that this part of the cast
be of the greatest possible strength in order to prevent the
block from falling out of the jacket when the-specimen it
turned over. If desired, greater strength may be obtained
by wrapping a collar composed, of several long pieces of bandage around the base of the entire pedestal.
The most desirable thickness for the jacket will be determined by the individual Collector o~y after considerable
experience ~n casting. Except in very small blocks, at least
two thicknesses of bandage should probably be used and in
specimens weighing several hundred pounds casts of an inch
or more in thickness may be advisable. It must be remem-

Vertebrate-Paleontological Field Techrdque

97

bered, however, that the thicker the cast the more difficult
will be the task of opening the specimen once it has been
received in the laboratory.
Casting of the upper side of each block should be accomplished in a single operation wherever possible since later
bandages will adhere with difficulty to .those in which the
plaster has already hardened. If this process cannot be
completed in one operation, the dry plaster bandages already
applied must be thoroughly moistened before new bandages
are laid upon them. Failure to clean the plaster bucket~
before each new mixing may result in the complete failure
of the new batch of plaster.
Large or irregular blocks may require additional strengthening. Such strength may be provided through the use of
wooden or metal splints which can be cut or bent to shape
and bandaged onto the exterior of the block.
When the plaster jacket has hardened the block must be
separated from the lower part of the pedestal. This is done
by.cutting away the base of the pedestal a small section at a
time until the block can be turned over from a pivotal
position. In small or moderate sized blocks this can usually
be accomplished in a single operation, but in larger blocks
containing unconsolidated matrices it may be necessary to
undermine a small area at.a time supporting each new
undercut with plaster bandages as:it is developed.
When overturning the block a lever should be inserted
beneath it and no great pressure should be applied to the
cast itself since at this stage there is usually only a narrow
"lip" of retaining bandages around the under edges of the
block and the danger of slipping the cast off of the top of the
black may be very great. Whenever possible the block
should be turned over in a single coordinated operation.
Once the operation has begun, hesitancy on the part of the
collector may prove fatal insofar as the specimen is concerned.
¯ Once inverted the reduction of the block may be completed. The amount of matrix that can be removed from

98

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

the open side of the block will be determined largely by the
method of preparation to be employed in the labortary, the
available means of transportation, and the overall strength
of the block itself.
The rough and jagged edges of the plaster Cast should be
cut away and the open side of the block bandaged in the
manner described above. To facilitate the opening of the
block in the laboratory, some collectors do not allow the
new cast to overlap or adhere to the other half, but prefer
to wind a long strip of bandage around the line of separation
of the two half-casts. This method cannot be recommended
for use in large blocks where strength of the cast is the paramount concern.
Applications in Archaeological Collecting
The method described in the preceding paragraphs presupposes that the subject is a skeleton or a mass of bones. It
can therefore be applied with little modification to the co!lecting of human skeletal material and associated artifacts
and burial regalia. The entire mass may later be prepared
as a panel or slab mount without the necessity of rearranging
any of the specimens concerned. In most instances, human
bones will be found enclosed in unconsolidated and poorly
compacted matrices and the bones themselves may exhibit
a strong tendency toward crumbling. Special precautions
wil! probably be necessary to prevent undue damage to the
specimen. Very little of the entombing matrix should be
removed from the upper surface of the skeleton and the
entire specimen should then be collected in a single block
still embedded in as much of the surrounding matrix as
possible. Caution should be exercised in casting a large
block of unconsolidated material to assure that no free
space occurs between the block and any part of the enclosing
cast. The smallest void can easily become a focal point for
crumbling and the ultimate disintegration of the entire block.
The cast must be strengthened by the use of splints and in
some instances it may be desirable to construct a crate or
box over the block before it is inverted.

Vertebrate Pa~eontolog~ca~ Field Technique

99

In collecting masses of fossil bones in which primitive
spear points have been located, the artifacts should be well
padded and their position plainly marked on the exterior of
the plaster jacket.
it seems probable that this technique may also be adapted
to the collecting of badly broken or crushed pottery vessels.
Excavation should proceed as outlined, followed by blocking
out and casting. The use of shellac, however, is not recommended. The surfaces of the pottery will not require hardening and some other material which can be readily removed
in the laboratory may be used for the purpose of holding
the broken fragments in their relative positions. Commercial
Gum Arabic is here suggested as a satisfactory substitute for
shellac. The dry powder can be mixed with water until a
liquid gum solution is obtained. The pottery surface may
then be coated with gum-soaked pieces of tissue paper or
surgical bandage. Removal of the gum may be accomplished
in the laboratory simply by dissolving it in warm water.
The laboratory technician may open the cast with all the
broken pieces still retained in their original positions. No
longer must he be confronted with a great mass of small
fragments, the piecing together of which often becomes a
tedious and exasperating process.
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Camp, C. L. and Hanna, G. D.,Methods in Paleontology. University of California Press, 1937. xxii÷153pp., 58 figs.
Hermann, A., Modern Laboratory Me~hods in Vertebrate Paleontology. American Museum of Natural History Bulletin Vol. 26, art.23, 1909, pp. 263-332.

100

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

CADDOAN PREHISTORY: THE

BOSSIER FOCUS
CLARENCE H.

WERB

Bossier Focus is the name which Krieger and the author
have given to an archaeological unit of the Caddoan area
which appears on a number of sites in Northwest Louisiana,
East Texas and possibl~ Southwest Arkansas. This cultural
assemblage has never been described and has. been mentioned
only. occasiona.lly in discussions of prehistory of the fourstate Caddoan area. This neglect is occasioned by the unspectacular nature of the sites and artifacts, the occurrence
of the sites away from the major river valleys and the
rarity of mound building--for these reasons Moore’s survey
of the Red, Ouachita and D’Arbonne (.1,2,3) valleys apparently missed Bossier sites completely. In Ford’s analysis (4)
of site collections, he describes and illustrates sherds collected by E. F. Neild which represent several Bossier pottery
types. However, no intensive study of Caddoan potteries
and culture Periods had been made and these sherds, as
well as others now recognized as relating to several cultural
entities, were lumped together as "Caddoan." Harrington
(5) illustrates one or two vessels of Bossier types from
Southwest Arkansas. These are probably instrusive, as none
of the sites described by him have cultural entities which
could be inte.rpreted as Bossier Focus components.
It now appears that a study of the Bossier Focus may cast
considerable light on culture developments in the Caddoan
area, particularly with regard, to origin and transmission of
certain pottery types or decorative elements. There is increasing evidence that Krieger’s (6) separation of culture
complexes in the Caddoan area into Gibson (earlier) and
Fulton (later) Aspects, which through much of the area are
so sharply differentiated as to suggest cultural discontinuity,
must be interpreted differently in certain developmental
centers. In the Spiro area and along the middle Red River
area of Arkansas and Louisiana there are indications of a

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

lOl

sequential development from the earliest Gibson period
through intermediate or transitional cultures to the proto=
historic and historic Caddoan groups. In the Red River
center, which is also the historic and traditional center of
the southern Caddos; the Haley, Bossier, McCurtain and
Belcher Foci show varying evidences of this culture transition.
Bossier Focus Sites
Surface collections indicate that this focus is represented
at some 40 to 50 sites in Northwest Louisiana, especially in
Bossier, Caddo and DeSoto parishes. Typical sites from
which we have an adequate collection to assure more than
accidental Bossier sherds include High Island, Sinner, Pease
and Maddox Places and Vanceville Mound in Bossier Parish; Marston Place and Gahagan Mound in Red River Parish;
Gilmer Bayou, Margetich, Huckabay, Mooringsport, Swanson’s Landing, Wallace Lake, Belcher II and Mounds Plantation in Caddo Parish; Smithport Landing, Chamarre,
East Smithport, Williams Point, Keatchie and Thigpen
sites in DeSoto Parish; Colbert and Greer Places in Bienville
Parish; Wilkinson and Allen in Natchitoches Parish; Smith
Place in Lincoln Parish; and Harrison Bayou site in Harrison
County, Texas. The University of Texas’ collections indicate
components on sites in a number of counties of central East
Texas, adjoining the Louisiana line. A recent survey of the
McGee Bend Reservoir (7) in Jasper, Sabine, San Augustine,
Angelina and Nacogdoches Counties, Texas, shows Bossier
Focus sherds from 16 sites. This indicates that the Focus
occurs in an area from the Angelina River in Texas almost
to the Ouachita River in Louisiana.
Community Plan

Nearly ai! of the sites are outside of the major river valleys, usually located on a small stream or lake. Many of the
larger sites are on hills fronting the valley, where tributaries break through these hills. Only the four mound sites,
Mounds Plantation, Belcher, Gahagan and Vanceville, and
one non-mound site, Marston Place, are on the valley floor of
the Red River--contrasting with the Belcher Focus, which

102

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

seems to be considerably riverine and mound using. At four
of the Bossier Focus sites, small conical sand mounds were
placed on hills overlooking the valley, on or near the village
sites. Their purpose or provenience have never been established. All have been dug into and a b~trial was reported
in one instance. Two beautifully symmetrical quartz lance
points were stated to have been the only artifacts with this
burial.
Village sites are usually compact, from a very small area
to 10 acres in size, and the communities seem to have been
sedentary in most instances, with evidence of prolonged
habitation. Krieger (8) has emphasized the contrast between the large, widely separated centers of economic and
ceremonial activity during the Gibson Period and the numerous small villages of the Fulton Period. This change
seems to have been in progress during the Alto-Bossier
transition, to be discussed later. Nearly all of the Bossier
sites have artifacts suggesting several occupation periods,
ranging at various sites from late Archaic to Glendora Focus
sherds and glass trade beads. European trade material
has never been found on Bossier sites unless Glendora pottery is represented. In a recent article (9) is was noted
that artifacts which have been related elsewhere to the late
Archaic occur in Northwest Louisiana on non-pottery sites
and also on sites where Bossier and Alto sherds were found.
One to three Marksville or Troyville Stamped sherds have
been found on four Bossier sites and numerous multiple
notched large projectile points, similar to those reported
from Marksville sites, occur at the Sinner Place. Eight sites
show marker Pottery types of the Coles Creek-Plaquemine
periods, in four instances to the extend of 4 to 5 per cent of
decorated sherds (Table 1). Certain incised and brushed
ware§ of Placluemine types in central Louisiana appear to be
identical or very similar to Bossier types in this area, suggesting contemporaneity of these two cultures.
Subsistence and Commerce
No direct evidence of agriculture has appeared, probably
due to very limited testing. It can only be inferred by the

Caddoan Prehts$ory:

The Bossier Focus

103

location of the sites near streams, the presence of rough
metates and manos, and the general prevalence of agriculture during the indicated time period. Animal and fish bones
in village middens indicate hunting and fishing as important
in the ecbnomy. Gathering of nuts and shellfish is suggested by the frequency of pitted stones or~ "nut stones" and
presence of shells in midden material. There is no indication of widespread commerce, most of the artifacts being
made of local materials. The absence of esoteric ceremonial
objects from burials also denotes a comparatively simple,
locally self-sufficient subsistence..
Architecture
Inadeql~ate data are available to warrant definite conclusions concerning house types. At the Belcher Mound site,
the second occupation period of Mound B (Belcher II) appears from the sherd collection to relate to Bossier Focus
peoples. No burials, whole vessels or artifacts other than
sherds were found. The initial Belcher I (Haley Focus) premound structure had been covered by 2 feet of fill, producing
a small, circular, flat topped mound which was capped completely with charcoal-streaked red clay. Through this cap
there were two irregular ovals ofpost molds (10), the inner
oval 13 by 15 feet in diameter, formed by 5 to 8 inch molds,
2 feet in depth. The outer oval, from the same surface, was
20 by 22 feet in diameter, formed of 3 to 4 inch molds, not
over 1 foot in depth. Both ovals were interrupted by burial
pits from higher levels, possibly obscuring entranceways. No
charred materials were found, differing from structures at
other levels in the mound. Internal post molds formed no
definite pattern. There was no ashbed within the smaller
structure but one was present between it and the larger oval.
If the ovals represented two different buildings, the ashbed
must have related to the larger, as it lay outside of and too
near ~the inner oval of molds for safety.
At the Greer Place in Bienville Parish, a mixed Coles
Creek-Alto-Bossier site, numerous post molds (10) were
found exten~ting through a layer of white and yellow sand,
about 8 inches beneath the plowed surface. Molds were so

104

Texas Archeo~og~cal and Paleontological Society

numerous that no definite house outlines could be distinguished, although some suggestion of two irregularly oval
structures with one or two possible projecting entranceways
could be imagined. Three small cache pits contained sherds,
shells and animal bones. Three firebeds were within the
area outlined by the special sand, one large firebed being of
especial interest because it overlay a cache pit, 2~/2 feet in
diameter, which had been dug into the hard clay subsoil to
a depth of 4 feet. It contained only a few pottery sherds.
Although two burials nearby had Coles Creek pottery in
association, no Coles Creek sherds were on or above the
house floor, whereas most of the 172 decorated sherds from
the cache pits, the house floor or the overlying soil were of
recognizable Bossier types. This led us to believe that the
structure or structures could safely be related to the Bossier
Focus.
Burial Customs
Only a few burials have been found or reported which we
can relate specifically to the Bossier Focus. In every instance the burials were in small, shallow pits, not over 2
feet in depth from the present surface, and scattered or~ the
village site. No large cemeteries have been located and no
burial mounds are indicated, unless the small sand mounds
previously mentioned prove to be such. No good evidence
on this point is available. There is no indication of special
preparation of the pits or pit floors. Skeletons were fully
extended, supine, with placement of one to three pottery
vessels above or near the head. With exception of one
pottery pipe, no artifacts other than pottery have accompanied the burials, and the pottery is not a specialized burial
ware.
At the Pease Place, one adult burial was exposed by plowing in recent years. Fragments of an engraved bowl were
secured at the time and later we found the body of a bottle
beside the skull. Both vessels were of the type Maddox
Band Engraved (Plate 11, Noso 1 and 2). Mr. Pease states
that other burials have been plowed up in the lbast, scattered
over the site, and he has not observed objects other than oc-

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

105

casional pottery with them. The head of the above burial
was directed toward the north.
Several burials have been plowed up or eroded out at the
nearby Sinner site, but no artifacts to our knowledge have
been found. At the Marston site, a flood cut through the
village, washing out bones and large pottery sherds of Bossier types. We found the remaining portion of one burial,
without artifacts, apparently extended, supine and the head
directed toward the east or northeast. A pipe (Plate 14,
No. 1) had been found nearby.
In construction of a road at Williams Point the burial of
an adult was exposed, from which a pottery pipe was
secured. We were unable to locate this pipe, but discarded
sherds also.found with the burial were assembled to reconstruct a jar of type Pease Brushed-Incised. Both of these
artifacts were stated to have been near the skull.
Mr. Brock Smith, of Dubach, Lincoln Parish, found several
burials on the Smith place near D’Arbonne Creek, a tributary of the Ouachita River. We were privileged to see two
of these burials with the artifacts, which had been removed
(Plate 17, Nos. 1 through 5) and are now at Louisiana State
University. The burials were adults, extended, supine and
single, about 1~ to 2 feet beneath the present surface. The
vessels were stated to have been above or near the skulls,
intact, and no other artifacts were found.
Burials have been found at other sites where Bossier
Focus is represented, but apparently the burials related to
other culture periods. At the Greer and Colbert Places,
several single burials were found; in two instances (Greer)
Coles Creek pottery was present. Other burials found by
ourselves and others were adults, fully extended and without
artifacts. This is not infrequent in Coles Creek sites and we
presumed that these were Coles Creek and not Bossier
burials.
At Smithport Landing, Monroe Dodd located a small cemetery which contained 12 burials. Associated pottery was of
the late Alto types or plain, and in one instance included a

106

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soc~,ety

total of 9 vessels. Ford found Alto type pottery with burials
at Allen and Wilkinson sites and also illustrates a vessel (4)
of Natchitoches Engraved (Glendora Focus) from the latter
site. At the same site, we found the burial of a child which
had no accompanying artifacts. The skeleton was fully
extended, with the head directed toward the east. Despite
the regular admixture of Alto and Bossier pottery sherds on
the sites, in no instance to my knowledge have vessels of
the two types been found with the same burial.
Ceramics

Discussion of pottery types of the Bossier Focus is limited
to some degree because it must be based largely on sherd
collections. However, we have more than 8,000 decorated
sherds from Bossier sites in Louisiana and Texas, in addition
to whole vessels~or photographs of vessels bearing typical
decoration 5f six of the seven .pottery types a~tributed to
Bossier potteries.
The vessels generally are small to average in size, seldom
exceeding 7 to 8 inches in height or diameter. The characteristic vessel shape for the five rough or utility types is the.
jar with ovoid body and everted rim, 5 to 8 inches in height,
with circular flat base. In the engraved types, the bowl and
bottle are characteristic forms, with cups, vases and jars
infrequent. The pottery is unspectacular in comparison
with the highly decorated wares of the Haley, Belcher, Texarkana and Glendora Foci in this same general area. Rough
utility wares decorated with incised, punctated, ridged and
brushed elements predominate and, even in the engraved
types, complicated or curvilinear designs are less frequent
than straight line, band or geometric designs. However, the
percentage of decorated sherds is comparatively high and
plain vessels seem to be infrequent. Red filming or inserPLATE
Pottery types of Bossier Focus. IWos. 1 ~nd 2, Maddox Band Engraved,
Nos. ~-5, T~ylor Engraved (Nos. 3 and 4 from l~rieger (6) ; No. 5 from Belcher
Site). No. 6 Pease Brushed-Incised; Nos. 7 and 8, Belcher Ridged; No. 9.
Sinner Linear Punetated (Harrington (5), Washington Site° Plate LVID.
Noso 10-12, Dunkin Incised, late variant, (No. 12 from East Mound, courtesy
of Dr. and i~,Irs. T. L. Hodges and Alex Krieger). Vessels x

6

I

Plate 1!

108

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

tion of pigment into engraved lines is rare; compound or
effigy vessels and even effigy appendages have not been
found.

Occasional highly polished sherds with engraved

decoration are found, but generally even the engraved wares
were smoothed but unpolished. Spurred or ticked lines,
negative discs and scrolls occur chiefly (or exclusively?) on
Taylor Engraved vessels which may not be indigenous to
Bossier Focus potteries. Rattle vessels, sun and swastika
symbols have not been found.
Vessels were made by coiling. The paste is generally firm,
of good texture, with hardness of 2.5 to 3. Clay tempering
predominates, with occasional bone or tufa tempering in the
rougher wares. Shell temper is absent at every site except
Belcher II, where sherds of two Belcher Ridged and one
brushed vessel were tempered with shell. It may be added
that at Belcher II level, 703 sherds were found, of which 627
could be typed reliably. Of the latter, although 80 per cent
were of Bossier types, 13 per cent were from recognizable
Belcher and Texarkana pottery types. Evidently the Bossier
occupation period at the Belcher site was comparatively
late, with introduction of Belcher Focus wares which occurred in subsequent periods at this site; in fact, it is a
reasonable supposition that the three shell tempered vessels
at this level were Belcher Focus vessels, as Belcher Ridged
and brushed types are found in both Belcher and Bossier
Foci. It may be stated, therefore, that shel! temper is
absent from Bossier Focus potteries.
Pottery Types
I. Maddox Band Engraved. Vessel forms in this type include bowls, bottles and small jars. (Plate 11, Nos. 1,2). Bottles are small, with flat circular bases, globular or ovoid
bodies and slightly tapering spouts which usually flare moderately at the rim. Bowls generally are 6 to 9 inches in diameter, with rounded bottoms, vertical or slightly inverted
rims and rolled or notched, slightly thickened lips. The paste
is homogeneous, usually clay tempered (rarely bone or tufa).
Thickness averages 1/s to 1/4 inch. Surfaces are smoothed,
occasionally polished; the surface color ranges from buff to

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

109

reddish brown, but a moderate number of sherds are black.
The decoration features hatched or cross hatched bands
(Plate 12, Nos, 1-6), usually narrow, rather carefully engraved. Less frequently plain bands or zones are outlined
by hachured areas. The designs are usually simple with rectangular or occasionally curvilinear vertical and horizontal
patterns. Bottles often have combined engraved lines and
bands or stepped patterns encircling the shoulder and lines
may encircle the spout near the lip. (Plate 17, No. 1). Bottles with this kind of decoration and with tapering spouts
may readily have been derived from Hickory engraved bottles of Alto focus pottery. Notched lips are not infrequent in
all vessel forms of Maddox Band engraved type, including
bottle spouts if they do not have flaring rims. (Plate 17,
No. 1).
In Ford’s analysis of site collections (4) sherds of Maddox
Band engraved are illustrated in Fig. 16c and 18b.
II. Taylor Engraved. Vessel forms include bowls, bottles,
vases and jars, although the first two predominate. The variety of forms is much more limited than seen in this type
as it appears in Titus and Belcher potteries. Bottle shapes
are not definite, although probably similar to the bottle of
Maddox Band Engraved. Bowls are round bottomed (hemispherical) with inward slanting rims which are often curved
sharply to produce a more acute angle at the shoulder than
is usual with Maddox bowls (Plate 11, No. 5). The paste,
surface finish and colors are similar to Maddox Band Engraved. Notched rims are absent or rare. Decoration features curvilinear lines, spurred lines, scrolls, bisected bands
(usually curving and bisected by spurred line), and negative discs (Plate 12, Nos. 7-10). Interlocking scrolls are very
frequent A few red filmed sherds have been found. Differing from Taylor Engraved bowls in the Belcher and Titus
pottery, the bowl sherds from Bossier sites never show
decorations on the bottoms. In our original description of
Belcher pottery (11) vessels which we now classify as Taylor Engraved are described under Belcher Engraved, subtypes d, f, k and e and illustrated in Plate 15, Nos. 3 and 5
and Plate 16, Nos. 1-3.

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

It is difficult to decide whether Taylor Engraved should be
included as an integral type of Bossier Focus potteries, as it.
occurs regularly in Titus and Belcher ceramics, from which
it could possibly have been intrusive into the Bossier Focu~
during its later stages. However, there are good evidences~
that Bossier Focus was generally earlier than Titus ands.
Belcher Foci and Taylor Engraved sherds are found on the.
majority of Bossier sites in quantities not greatly inferior.
to Maddox Engraved. One may therefore infer that Taylor
Engraved was an integral type in Bossier pottery, probably
spreading from there to Belcher and Titus Foci, where it~
was elaborated.
III. Pease B~’ushed-Incised. (Plate 11, No. 6; Plate 12, Nos_
12-19; Plate 17, Nos. 4-5). Vessel forms include jars and pots,.
predominantly ovoid jars with everted rims. Temper is
almost invariably clay ~r mixed clay and grit, rarely bone or
tufa (accidental?), never shell. The color is buff to mottled
grayish-black, often variable due to irregular firing. SurN
faces are rough and irregular: Bases are flat and circular.
The bodies are usually wider in their lower segments, curv-.
ing inward toward the neck, and the diameter at the lip i~
generally less than the maximum diameter of the body.
The rims are usually narrow, flaring, often with rolled or
thickened lips, the latter frequently notched. An occasional
vessel has a tall, everted rim: The outer surface of the rim.
is usually roughened by brushing, scoring or incising, which
may be vertical, diagonal or, rarely, horizontal. The body
is covered over its entire outer surface with panels which
are also roughened by brushing or incising (diagonal, vertical, herringbone) and the panels are separated by vertical
notched ridges, nodes or deep punctates. In the typicaI
vessel, the panels are 1~ to 1½ inches in width, varying from
10 to 30 in number around the body. The inside of the vessel
is well smoothed, often showing tool marks.
This pottery type is undoubtedly related to, and may be
directly descendant from, the type Haley Complicated Incised (6) of the Haley Focus (Gibson Aspect). In the latter
type fields of vigorous incising are outlined by applique

t~LATE
Sherds
]o6).

of

T~’lor

:Bossier

Focus

Engraved

l~ottery

(Nos.

and S|nner Linear :PImctated

7-11)0
(Nos,

12

~yDes.
Pease

20-~1).

BIaddox

Band

Engraved

:Brushed-:Inctsed

(Nos.

Caddoan Prehis$ory:

The Bossier Focus

113

notched ridges and punctates, usually applied in diagonal or
curvilinear patterns. Vessel forms are similar to Pease type,
but tend to be larger, with tall everted rims. During the
latter stages of the Haley period there is a tendency toward
vertical fields separated by widely spaced nodes, ridges or
punctates, and roughened either by incising or brushing
(brushing never appears in the early pottery of any of the
Gibson Foci). Rims are still high, but the general appearance of the vessels and their decoration is shifting toward
the Pease type.
Pottery from the East Mound, a Haley Focus site on
Antoine River in southern Arkansas, includes a number of
vessels which have shapes similar to Peas~ vessels and
decoration consisting of incised fields, often herringbone,
separated by incisions, nodes or lines of punctates. Som~
of the fields are vertical, others horizontal. This pottery is
illustrated by Krieger (8) in the forthcoming /~Ato Focus
volume. Ford (4) illustrates sherds of Pease Brushed-Incised from the Wilkinson and Harrisor~ Bayou sites in Figs.
16h and 18d, f, g. "
IV. Belcher Ridged. (Plate 11, Nos, 7, 8; Plate 13, Nos. 1-5;
Plate 14, No. 5). This type was originally described by the
author and Dodd (12) in discussing pottery types from the
Belcher Mound. Belcher Ridged sherds or vessels were
abundant in the last three of the four occupation levels of
Mound B, and the type is found at all Bossier and Belcher
Focus sites.
As the type appears in Bossier Focus, vessel forms include
urns or jars, pots and cups. The jars average 7 to 10 inches
in height, 3/16 to 5/16 inch in thickness of walls. Temper is
usually clay or grit, occasionally bone or tufa; the paste is
firm and durable. External color ranges from tan to black,
although tan to reddish brown predominates. Bases are fiat
discs, bodies ovate, rims everted or rolled outward. Rolled
rims are undecorated; everted rims are 1 to 1~/2 inches in
height and decorated on the outer surface with vertical or
horizontal incising (rarely brushing). Bodies have vertical,
closely placed (~/s to ~/s in.) narrow ridges formed by vertical

114

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

tooling and extending from neck to base on practically every
vessel.
Although this type is common to Bossier and Belcher Foci
potteries, certain differences appear. At Belcher Focus sites,
Belcher ridged is often shell tempered; the color is more
frequently dark brown to black; rims are more often rolled
and, if flaring, not as tall as in Bossier; the ridges are more
closely placed and uniform; vessel walls are thinner and
vessel shapes more symmetrical.
In addition to its presence in Bossier and Belcher Foci,
Belcher Ridged is stated by Krieger (13) to be intrusive in
Texarkana Focus sites, apparently from Belcher Focus pottery since it is accompanied by the type Belcher Engraved.
Ford and Willey (14) illustrate one sherd of Belcher Ridged,
which they tentatively called Maddox Finger Brushed, from
the late occupation of the Crooks Mound Site. Ford (4) illustrates other sherds of this type from Northwest Louisiana
sites (Fig. 16 j; 18 i), describing it under the formula 63; 42.
As was pointed out in the Belcher report (11), we cannot
agree that the ridging was always formed by finger brushing,
having found tool scratches or marks on many vessels, hence
prefer to designate the type as Ridged without reference to
method of producing the ridges.
V. Sinner Linear Punc~ate. (Plate 11, No. 9; Plate 12, Nos.
20-31; Plate 14, Nos. 3, 4). Vessel shapes include jars, cups
(compound in one instance) and globular pots. The vessels
are usually smaller than Belcher Ridged or Pease BrushedIncised vessels, but wall thickness is comparable. The paste
is firm, tempered with clay or clay and grit, rarely bone.
External colors range from buff to mottled gray-black (differential firing). Bases are flat discs; jar bodies are ovate,
cups and pots globular; rims are everted and often notched
at the lip. The bodies and often the external surface of the
rims are decorated with lines formed by closely placed tool
punctations which are so regular as. often to give the suggestion of heavily cord marked decoration. Less often the
linear punctations are made by finger nail impressions. The
lines are often arranged in fields with alternating direction

7

I~LATE
Sherds of Bossier Focus pottery lyp(~s, ]3elcher Ridged (Nos. 1-5)
Incised, late variant,

(Nos. 6-15)

and .Maddox ]:h.ush,’_-d

(Nos~

])unkin

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

117

of diagonally placed lines; vertical rows of nodes at times
quadrate the body surface (Plate 11, No. 9) and occasionally
the decorative technics of Sinner Linear Punctated and
Pease Brushed-Incised are combined, with regular vertical
fields roughened by linear punctations, separated by nodes,
applique ridges or heavy punctations.
Although never a frequent type at any site, Sinner Linear
Punctated is rather widespread. Moore (2) illustrated a pot
with this decoration (Fig. 96, page 95) from the Keller Place,
a mound site on the Ouachita River in Calhoun County,
Ark. The vessel has a notched rim and 5 vertical rows of
applique nodes separate the fields of punctations. Moore
noted that the tool punctated lines produce an effect similar
to cord marking. Harrington (5) illustrated two vessels of
this type, a pot in Plate LVII and conjoined cups in Plate
XCVI, a, from the Washington site in Arkansas. Dr. and Mrs.
Hodges of Bismark, Ark., include in their collection of 1,000
vessels from the Mid-Ouachita area seven vessels of Sinner
Linear Punctate type (Plate 14, Nos. 3, 4) ; no other Bossier
Focus types are represented, although many of the Belcher
and Glendora Foci types are included.
Lake Borne Incised type in the Tchefuncte period (15), the
earliest known pottery in the lower Mississippi valley, features linear punctations in closely placed parallel lines,
arranged in herringbone, triangles, squares, diamonds and a
key design. Indeed, there is a startling similarity of decoration technique and design arrangement between Lake Borne
Incised and Sinner Linear Punctated, considering the fact
that intervening cultures--Marksville, Troyville and Coles
Creek--lack this incising technique. The nearest approaches
are the drag and punch technique of Weeden Island Incised,
the linear stamping of Deptford and Troyville potteries and
occasional linear arrangement of fingernail or tool punctations in Coles Creek and Plaquemine potteries. In none of
these are the linear punctations closely placed to cover the
entire vessel surface, nor do the punctated lines have the
same similarity to cord marking seen in Sinner Linear
Punctated.

Texas Archeo~ogicaI and Paleontological Society

118

In the Crooks site report (14) Ford and Willey illustrate
linear punctated sherds, one type, LaSalle Punctated, attributed to the late horizon. A second group of 4 sherds in Fig.
19 includes one (No. d) which has the appearance of Sinner
Linear Punctated.
VI. Dunkin Incised, Late Variant.~ (Plate 11, Nos. i0-12;
Plate 13, Nos. 6-15). Vessel forms include jars, vases, pots
and cups. The paste is homogeneous, clay, clay and grit,
rarely bone or tufa tempered. Hardness ranges from 2 to 3.
Inner surfaces are smoothed, tool marked; outer surfaces
rough to slightly smoothed. Surface colors are characteristically tan to brown, a few reddish tan or dark brown.
Bottoms are fiat discs, bodies seldom tall; rims may be
tall, generally slanting outward or curving outward, rarely
incurving. Notches are often present on the lip, which may
be direct or slightly thickened and nearly always rounded.
Thickness varies from 3/16 to 5/16 inch; average ¥4 inch.
Decoration consists of parallel, roughly incised lines, typically horizontal but sometimes diagonal or vertical, applied
over .the entire body in most instances, at othdr times only the
rim or upper portion of the vessel. Where diagonal incisions
are present, fields of nested triangles, diamonds, squares or
herringbone arrangements are noted. Incised lines are
closely placed, usually bold, although gradations from deep
tra.iling to light scoring are to be found.
This type seems to be a continuation of the parallel incising technique which is found in all potteries of the lower
Mississippi Valley and most of the Caddo area, from Tche*In

Plaquemine

Potter~,

vessels

with

parallel

hori~ntal

inct~d

lln~

around

the ~ms, cruder and appa~ntly d~enera~ from Coles C~k Incised, were call~
~a~y Incised by Ford and ~workers. Ca~ula Incl., ~n~n Incl..
Bayou Inc~ and P~on~s Diagonal Incis~ ~ ~ ~ vaHan~ of the same
time pe~od, with diRgonM, ve~i~ and cross incising. In K~er’n earlier publication (6). v~Is £~m Al~ F~us ~ving hori~n~ p~llel inci~ng around
~ms and plain or nail punc~t~ b~i~ w~e refe~ to and illustrated as Hardy
Incl.; t~se ~th d~n~ incis~g ~ Dunkin Incise. Du~ng the Al~
3~Bo~ier t~nsition, numerous v~iations in pla~ent and ~ecu~on of incis~
lin~ a~p~, ~ ~st n~l~ multiplici~ of ty~ would ~ult if ~p~a~ n~
w~e given to ~h variant. By mutu~ ~reem~t, the ~pe Dunkin Ine~ ~f~
~ ~t~ of the earlier AIw pe~ wi~ fi~, s~th w~e; st~igh~sid~
~k~, v~e and ~wl forms and fi~, smith incising. Dunkin Inci~
variant, refers ~ the Phase S---Bossier and late HMey inci~ ~t~ ~ d~crib~
a~ve. S~ K~er "The AI~ Fo~" (8).

Pottery pipes, ~o. 1 froln ~,larstol~ Place, No. 2 from Pease Place, 8tllller
Ll~ear Punctated pottery, Nos. :~ and 4 (~fid-Ouachita Area. courtesy Dr.
:rod .Mrs. T. L. Hedges, photographs by Alex Krleger).
Belcher Ridged
pottery, No. 5, fron~ l~eleher ~lot~d. ~’os. l thrll 4, x 1-2; .No. 5, x 1-8.

Caddoan Prehis$ory:

The Bossier Focus

121

functe to historic Glendora. Its immediate predecessors
appear to be Coles Creek, Mazique and Chase Incised of the
Coles Creek period; Davis and Dunkin Incised of the Alto
potteries.
Dunkin Incised, late variant, is generally cruder than
these, with sloppy or irregular, application of incisions and
the development of everted rims, whereas .most incised vessels of the earlier periods mentioned above have no definite
shoulders and rims. Dunkin Incised, late variant, in fact,
seemed to develop in the later stages of Alto and~ I-Ialey potteries, also in the period of transition from Coles Creek to
Plaquemine in central Louisiana, and the incised pottery of
Bossier focus seems to be part of this general development
(Plate 17).
VII. Brushed Wares. Every site of the Bossier Focus has a
considerable amount of brushed pottery varying from 2 to 25
per cent of decorated sherds. Undoubtedly many of these
may be attributed to other cultures represented on these
sites, as brushing becomes very frequent in all later periods,
but this universal appearance, even on almost pure Bossier
sites, makes it necessary to include brushed wares among
the Bossier pottery types. No whole vessels have been
found, l~either are there illustrations from reports elsewhere
which give good clues to definite vessel shapes.
Many of the sherds are similar to two types illustrated by
Ford (4) on pages 91 and elsewhere, now attributed to
Plaquemine and Caddo potteries. Ford and his co-workers
later called these two Anna Random Brushed and lYladdox
Cross Brushed. A third type of rather firm and regular
brushing was termed Plaquemine Brushed. A few sherds
on Bossier sites show the vertical brushing of Glassell
Brushed, of the Belcher Focus, but without shell tempering.
Believing that occasional cross brushing is fortuitous and
that .unnecessarily complicated typology should be eliminated, the name Maddox Brushed is assigned by the author
to cover brushed wares indigenous to Bossier focus.
Maddox Brushed. (Plate 13, Nos. 16-24). Vessel forms of
this type apparently are quite similar to those of Pease

122

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Brushed Incised and Belcher Ridged, as are the paste, colors
and general appearance of sherds.

Rims are everted, occa-

sionally thickened or rolled and frequently notched. If rims
are brushed, the arrangement is usually horizontal. On the
body, brushing may be irregular, horizontal, vertical or in
herringbone bands similar to the incised wares. In a few
instances vessel surfaces have widely spaced (probably
quadrating) vertical nodes or ridges, with brushing between.
This arrangement is similar to that of Pease Brushed-Incised
except for the wide spacing of the nodes or ridges.
Decoration by brushing has not been described for the
Coles Creek, Troyville or Marksville periods in central Louisiana and the lower Mississippi Valley, but one brushed type,
Chinchuba Brushed, is described for the Tchefuncte Culture
(15). The situation is much the same as noted in discussion
of linear punctated types, where similarly a decoration
technic present in, Tchefuncte is interrupted by the Marksville-Troyville-Coles Creek sequence, to reappear in the Bossier horizon. Brushed wares also are present in Plaquemine
of central Louisiana and appear in Phase 3 of the Davis Site.
(8), possibly intrusive from Plaquemine pottery. Similarly
the Haley Focus of southwest Arkansas in its later stages
reveals the development of brushing in place of incising
over the bodies of utility vessels.
Other Pottery Complexes
It has been observed that two or more pottery complexes
are represented at practically every site at which Bossier
Focus pottery is found. Eliminating Dunkin Incised, late
variant, other non-definitive incised sherds, and all brushed
wares, all of which may be held in common by two or more
complexes, one finds that marker sherds of Marksville-Troyville, Coles Creek-Plaquemine, Alto and Glendora pottery
complexes are present on various listed sites (Table I).
Moreover, two sites have sherds of Belcher Focus and one
site has Choctaw and Natchez sherds. Marston, Pease, Sinner and High Island are strong Bossier sites, with less than
5 per cent Alto sherds and ~ninimal amounts of other recognizable complexes. These sites occur in a north-south axis

Caddoan

PreMstory:

Focus

The Bossier

123

TABLE I. PERCENTAGE OF DECORATED SHERDS’~
FROM VARIOUS SITES WHICH ARE MARKER
SHERDS OF POTTERY COiVfPLEXES.

Marston Place ........ 1223
Sinner Place ............ 772
Pease Place .............. 778
High Island ................ 290
Harrison Bayou ...... 237
Swanson’s Landing 167
Gflmer Bayou .......... 122
Keatchie ...................347
Smithport Landing 584

0.1
0
0
0
0.4
4.6
0
0
4.6

1.5
3.5
2.3
0.6
4.8
7.4
5.4
1.4
28.4

45.4
43.1
46.8
38.1
29.8
20.0
22.8
14.9
7.1

0
0.3
1.0
2.0
0
0
0
0.6
2.0

0
0
(5)
0
0
(5)
0
(6)
0

Wilkinson Place ...... 347

1.1

29.4

11.5

1.0

0

........ 206

1.5

16.0

4.5

Colbert Place ............ 930

11.0

10.1

16.4

Chamarre Lake

0

(5) (7)

0.1

(5)

Greer Place .............. 300

4.0

14.1

16.0

1.7

0

Mounds Plantation 397

2.5

7.0

21.7

2.5

(8)

Belcher II .................. 703

0

3.6

40.5

0

(9)

(I) Coles Creek types include Cole~ Creek, Chase. Mazique and French Fork
Incised, Chevalier Stamved and Rhinehart Punctated.
(2) Alto ~pes include Pennington Punctate--Incised, Wech~s Fingernail Impressed, Wilkinson Fingernail Punctat~d, Crockett Curvilinear Incised,
Hickory and Holly Engraved.
(3) Bossier types include Pease Brushed-Incised, Belcher Ridged, Sinner ]Linear
Punctated, ~daddox and Taylor Engraved,
(4) Giendora typos include Natchitoches Engraved and Keno Trailed.
(5) One to three Marksville-Troyville sherds at each of these sites, including
Marksvil]e and Troyville Stamped and Churupa Punctated,
(6) Brushed sherds suggesting Bullard Brushed of Frankston Focus constitute
40% of decorated sherds at Keatchie site: 1 sherd of Belcher Engraved.
(7),Three sherds of Chickachee
Incised (Natchez).

Combed

(Choctaw)

and

one of

Fatherland

(8) Belcher Focus, 2~’~ o£ decorated ~herds.
(9) Belcher Focus 6.6% and Texarkana Focus. 6.7% of decorated sherds.

*Dunkin Incised, late variant, and all Brushed sherds are omitted from tabulation because they are common to several pottery complexes.

124

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

on a series of lateral waterways along the eastern hill escarpment of Red River valley in Bossier and subjacent Red River
parishes.
Harrison Bayou, Swanson’s Landing, Gilmer
Bayou and Keatchie, all outside of the river valley, have a
major representation of Bossier Focus pottery, with appreciable amounts from other complexes. Smithport, Wilkinson and Chamarre Lake sites have Alto Focus pottery as the
major component, with smaller amounts of Bossier Focus
pottery; these sites are in a group on the west side of the
valley and "further south than the major Bossier group.
Colbert and Greer places, about 4{} miles east of Shreveport
and located on Black Bayou which flows into Red River
below Natchitoches, are mixed sites with appreciable
amounts of Coles Creek, Alto and Bossier potteries.
Motmds Plantation and .Belcher are mound sites in the
river valley, with representation of several culture periods.
At Belcher, controlled excavations of Mound B, which had
4 habitation levels separated by almost sterile sand fills,
afforded good clues of Bossier temporal relationship, in that
Belcher II, where 72 per cent of recognizable sherds were of
Bossier types, was preceded by a ttaley Focus (Gibson Aspect) habitation and burials, with characteristic burial customs, projectile types (Alba Barbed), long stemmed pipe
and pottery which in burial vessels and house floor sherds
was a mixture of Haley and Alto Focus types. On the Other
hand, Belcher habitation levels III and IV exhibited typical
Belcher Focus (Fulton Aspect) pottery on house floors and
in burials, together with other artifact types and culture
traits which distinguish this Focus in its several components.
It is interesting to speculate as to the reason why so many
sites where Bossier Focus is represented have a number of
other culture complexes in evidence. Although only those
sites are tabulated from which we have more than 100 decorated sherds, the same situation prevails throughout the
area. This is especially true of Alto Focus pottery types,
which the table shows to be present with Bossier on each of
the 15 listed sites. Stevenson (7) reports a similar situation
in the McGee Bend Reservoir in east Texas, where Alto
~ypes were found on 12 of the 16 sites which had Bossier rep-

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

125

resentation. Krieger (8) states that these Alto sherds are
chiefly of the Phase 3 or late Alto types and limited to rough
utility wares, which to a considerable extent is true in Louisiana. Four of the sites listed in Table I are considered as
major or unquestioned Alto sites--Smithport, .Wilkinson,
Colbert and Greer, in addition to Allen which is not listed-since they yield a practically full range of Alto pottery types,
in addition to the appreciable percentile representation.
Relative Frequency o] Bossier Pottery Types
Table II shows the percentage occurrence of the various
pottery types ascribed to Bossier Focus in the 15 sites deTABLE II. PERCENTAGE OF DECORATED SHERDS
IN VARIOUS BOSSIER POTTERY TYPES*

Marston Place ........... :..4.0
Sinner Place ................. 1.9
Pease Place ................. 2.0
High Island ..................2.4
Harrison Bayou .......... 0.8
Swanson’s Landing .... 0
Gilmer Bayou .............. 0
Keatchie ........................ 2.0
Smithport Landing .... 0.5
Wilkinson Place .......... 1.5
Chamarre Lake .......... 0
Colbert Place
.3.7
.2.8
Greer Place
Mounds Plantation .... 0.5
Belcher II .................. _0.7

0.2
2.2
4.4
1.4
2.0
0
0
0.3
0
0.9
0
0.8
0.8
0
1.0

.19.0
18.6
19.8
16.3
27.0
9.4
13.4
11.4
4.5
3.2
4.5
2.5
3.0
3.0
3.4

21.0
12.0
16.0
16.0
0
10.0
3.0
0.6
1.4
5.0
0
5.0
6.0
18.0
35.4

1.2
8.4
4.6
2.0
0
0.6
6.4
0.6
0.7
0.9
0
4.4
3.3
0.2
0

19.0
37.4
38.0
33.4
14.3
43.0
32.3
13.2
36.6
36.0
54.0
38.5
41.0
38.0
26.2

*The figures indlc~t~ percentages of all decorated sherds i~rom the
the given type represents ; not the percentage of Bossier sherds alone.

site

27.0
7.0
8.6
9.0
41.0
12.0
16.6
24.5
6.8
5.0
13.5
8.5
8.0
2.5
2.7
which

126

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

scribed above. It is to be remembered that Dunkin Incised,
late variant, also occurs in Alto and Plaquemine potteries.
However, its occurrence is remarkably constant, between 32
and 43 per cent in 10 of the 15 sites, regardless of complexes
represented.

It is also to be noted that the four adjoining

Bossier sites, Marston, Sinner, Pease and High Island, present
quite consistent figures for six types.

The considerably

higher percentage of brushed sherds at Marston, with some
relative increase in Maddox Band Engraved and decrease in
Sinner Linear Punctated, may have temporal significance.
This is the only non-mound site of Bossier Focus which is
situated in the Red River valley; of all sites it more nearly
approaches a pure Bossier Focus site, with very low p~rcentage of Alto and Coles Creek sherds (one Coles Creek,
19 Alto sherds in a total of 1,223). This site may well have
existed at a later time than the others, and may represent a
movement of Bossier peoples from the hillsides down into
the valley; inadequate studies of the Vanceville mound are
available to indicate whether this site may represent a
similar trend.
Away from the four-site center of Bossier Focus, the pottery types tend to show a more spotty distribution (although
smaller sherd sampling at several sites may have its ’effect).
Pease Brushed-Incised, Dunkin Incised, late variant, and
Maddox Brushed are found at all 15 sites; Belcher Ridged is
absent from 2 sites; Sinner Linear Punctated and Maddox
Engraved from 3 sites each and Taylor Engraved from 5
sites. Pease Brushed-Incised and Belcher Ridged are the
two most consistent and reliable indicators of Bossier Focus
pottery, especially in the absence of marker types of Belcher
Focus, where Belcher Ridged would be confusing.
At the typical Bossier sites, the engraved types constitute
only 4 to 6 per cent of the total decorated sherds, contrasting
with the finding of 17.7 and 11.8 per cent engraved sherds in
the Belcher Focus levels III and IV of the Belcher Mound
site.

Caddoan Preh~stor~:

The Bossier Focu~

127

Other Clay ArtiSacts
Clay Pipes. A large fragment of an elbow pipe (Plate 14,
No. 2) was found on the surface of the Pease Place. Neither
end is complete, but the bowl and stdm ends of the fragment
seemed about equal in size and caliber of opening. The surface was smoothed and decorated with engraved, ticked or
spurred lines encircling the stem and bowl, with a concentric
circle of spurred lines between. The pipe found with the
Williams Point burial was stated to be of the elbow type,
but was not seen by the author. The pipe which was washed
out near the burial at the lYIarston Place (Plate 14, No. 1) is
a modification of the elbow pipe. The base is cuboidal, of
solid, well fired, clay tempered pottery, bearing incised concentric Circles on 3 sides and notching of all edges. Again
the bowl and mouthpiece are broken, but the remaining
parts show openings of approximately equal caliber joined
by a small hole. There is a suggestion of mild flare to the
sides of the bowl.
Stem or bowl fragments of long stemmed pottery pipes
were found at Mounds Plantation and Harrison Bayou sites.
Since these have been associated universally with the Gibson
period and have not been found at other Bossier sites, they
undoubtedly derive from the Alto Focus occupation at these
two sites.
Pottery Discs. Fragments of flat pottery discs were found
at numerous sites, including Marston, Pease, Swanson’s
Landing, Gilmer Bayou, Wilkinson, and 3 each at Sinner,
Colbert and Greer Places, of the sites listed in Table I. These
discs vary from approximately 2 to 4 inches in diameter,
have a smooth central perforation and may be cut from
decorated sherds or be flat undecorated discs (from vessel
bases?). An entire large disc (Plate 16, No. 1) from the
Marston Place is 3¼ inches in diameter and the central
perforation measures % inch. The excellent balance of this
disc lends weight to the supposition that these objects were
spindle whorls.
Clay Figurines. Fragments of figurines are about as widely
distributed as discs. 6 figurine fragments were found at

128

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Marston Place, indicating almost certainly that they were
made by Bossier Focus people, since this is almost a pure
site. One or more fragments (Plate 16, No. 4) came from the
East Smithport, Sinner, Pease, Wilkinson, Greer and Colbert
(6 fragments) sites. No entire figurines have been found
and no head or face fragments. If the figurines were entire
and proportionate to the size of the fragments, they ranged
from 2 to 3 inches in height.
Other Objects. One bead-like object made from a pottery
she,d (Plate 16, No. 2) was found at Sinner Place. It is
1 1/16 by 1 inches in size, shield shaped, with smooth central
perforation. A small pestle or pin shaped object (Plate 16,
No. 8) from the Marston Place is different from anything
seen in this area. Except for its very small size (l~/s inches
in length) and base, it suggests the Middle Mississippi pottery trowels.
Chipped Stone Arti]acts
The multi-cultural status of the sites described makes it
difficult to assign artifacts to a given culture, especially since
no objects other than pottery and pipes have been associated
with burials. We can only assay the artifact assemblage
generally found on sites which have a major Bossier pottery
representation, eliminating those types known to have narrow cultural affiliations (for example, long-stemmed pipes).
Every site which exhibits Bossier pottery, with exception
of the large mound sites, has a variety of chipped stone artifacts, including large and small projectile points, several
types of scrapers, and drills. This is a consistent finding in
northwest Louisiana and in the MeGee Bend Reservoir (7).
A similar situation prevailed in theHenrietta Focus of central North Texas (6) and Fourche Maline in Oklahoma, in
which instances it was thought to represent a carry-over of
Archaic traits, including use of the atlatl.
Large Projectile Points. At the Sinner, Pease, Swanson’s
Landing, Harrison Bayou, Keatchie and Gilmer Bayou sites,
large projectiles were 3 to 10 times as numerous as the small
points; at Smithport twice as numerous; while at Allen, Col-

Caddoan Prehis~ory:

The Bossier Focus

131

bert and Greer the small (arrow) points exceeded the large
(dart) points in frequency.

The four latter are major Alto

Focus sites and three of them have Coles Creek representation, whence many of the small points may be derived.
The larger (dart) points (Plate 15) include lozenge-shaped
(Nos. 15, 16), simple haft or contracting base (Nos. 18-21)
and barbed, with expanded (No. 17) or contracting base, all
of which appeared in the Tchefuncte (15), Poverty Point
(9) and Marksville (14) cultures in Louisiana and seem to
be carried over from the late Archaic horizon. One of the
contracting base or simple haft type (No. 19) was found at
the Marston site, where there is no evidence of Archaic or
Marksville artifacts. This finding, with its widespread occurrence on other sites, suggests that some of these early
dart types may have been carried over into the Bossier
period.
On several sites, but particularly at the Sinner and nearby
Pease places, many large projectiles with expanded base,
barbed shoulders and multiple side notches (Plate 15, Nos.
6-7) were found. Points of this type were associated with
Marksville culture at the Crooks site (14) and on the
Ouachita River in Arkansas (~16). Other expanded base
barbed (corner notdhed) points (Plate 15, No. 17) from
several sites may or may not have serrated edges.
We have previously described (17) the San Patrice concave base projectile point (Plate 15, Nos.. 8, 9), with concave
base thinned by bilateral short channel grooving. These
have been found on 6 of the 15 sites in Table I, in addition
to a number of other unlisted sites.
Small Projectile Points. Those sites where small points
exceeded the large in frequency showed a preponderance
of Alba Barbed (Plate 16, Nos. 24-26), the dominant projectile type of Alto (6, 8) and Gahagar~ (18) Foci of the
Gibson Aspect, and several types (including the "fir-tree")
attributed to Coles Creek cultures (Plate 16, Nos. 27-35).
Two points of type Alba Barbed (Plate 16, Nos. 24, 25) were
among the five small points found at Marston Place. It i~

132

Texas ArcheotogicaI and Paleontological Society

possible, but by no means certain, that this type carried over
into Bossier Focus.
Bassett Pointed Stem type, the characteristic projectile
of Belcher and Texarkana Foci, a keen, small point with
straight sides, acutely barbed shoulders and short pointed
stems, was found on only two of the listed sites. At the
Belcher Mound, this type appeared at the third or Belcher
Focus level, after the Bossier habitation period.
Several other types of small projectile, found on the Bossier sites (Plate 16, Nos. 19-23) are of uncertain provenience.
As yet it is not possible to establish the resident type of
small or large points for Bossier Focus, although there is
good indication that both are present.
Scrapers. Large and small, triangular, oval, keel-shaped,
and reworked projectile ("bunt") scrapers are all represented, with both side and end scraper types. The most
frequent types, considered likely as resident types of the
Bossier Focus, are small oval or triangular, thin, usually
3~ to 1 inch in length; larger triangular scrapers or knives
(Plate 15, Nos. 11, 12) and the Albany type beveled scraper
or spokeshave (Plate 15, Nos. 13-14) previously described as
being limited to this area and often associated with the San
Patrice concave base projectile (17)..
Drills. As with projectiles and scrapers, several types of
drills found on these sites are of uncertain association. Included are narrow, diamond-sectioned (Plate 16, Nos. 14, 15) ;
small expanded-base (Plate 16, Nos. 10-12) and a few large
expanded base or T-shaped. The small, expanded base type
is more often found on Coles Creek sites but probably was
used also by Bossier peoples. The other two types have
been associated with the late Archaic throughout the southeast.
Ground Stone Objects
Celts. Rectangular and rectanguloid celts or adzes with
squared base and mildly curved edges (Plate 15, No. 4)
constitute the predominant type.
Edges are usually
rounded, but in many instances natural flat stones were used

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

133

with minimal modification. For this reason thickness varied
considerably.

The usual range of size is 4 to 5~ inches in

length and 2 to 3 inches in width.

Triangular celts (Plate

15, No.5) are less frequent, often larger and thicker and less
symmetrical than the small triangular celts of the Coles
Creek period.

Long, massive, thick polled celts are even

scarcer and have usually been attributed to the late Archaic.
Small chisels or wedges are rare.
Grooved Axes. Although less numerous than celts, grooved
axes have been found at a few of these sites. They are fully
grooved, rectanguloid with squared or mildly rounded bases,
quite thick with less acute blades than the celts. The average objects are 3½ to 5 inches in length, 2 to 3 inches in
width and ! to 1½ inches thick.
Manos’ Metates, Pitted and Pecking Stones. Oval or
spheroidal manos, usually rough edged, and sandstone
mortars, or milling slabs, with shallow basins occur on most
of these sites. No metates which show evidence of back-andforth grinding were found, and apparently circular grinding
in comparatively small basins prevailed. Many of the
manos (Plate 15, No. 2) and even mortars (Plate 15, No. 3)
had pits on one or both sides, indicating use for both "grinding
and nut cracking. Other pitted stones are numerous, and
combination pitted and pecking stones are not infrequent.
Pecking stones, with or without pits, are about convenient
hand size; some pitted stones, however, are large with multiple pits. No large mauls and only a few hammerstones of
moderate size have been found.
Stone Beads. No beads have been found with burials of
this focus. A few tubular or long, rectangular (Plate 16,
No. 5) polished beads of tan or grey stone may relate to the
Archaic (as they also occur on non-pottery sites). An engraved (effigy?) bead of gray slate from the Sinner site is
illustrated by Ford (4) and a modified barrel-shaped counter-drilled bead of banded slate was found at Smithport
Landing. An odd-shaped bead form (Plate 16, No. 3) of
ferruginous sandstone was a surface find at the Sinner site.

134

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

Red jasper and bird effigy beads, so numerous at Poverty
Point site (9), have not appeared in Bossier Focus sites.
Problematical Stone Artifacts. Ford (4) illustrates portions of a greenstone gorget (3 hole?), granite boatstone and
slate bead (small biconical bannerstone?) collected by Neild
from the Harrison Bayou site. A carved stone mask or effigy
pendant from Sinner site appears in the same illustration.
An entire two-hole gorget (Plate 16, No. 9) was found by
the author washed out from the Gilmer Bayou site, apparently from midden material, as there was noevidence of a
burial. Several fragments of bannerstones came from the
Pease site and the occasional finding of gorget, boatstone or
bannerstone portions have been reported at other Bossier
components.
Other Polished Stone Objects. No association of stone
pipes, pipe fragments or plummets with Bossier Focus has
come to the author’s attention. A rectangular, thin, polished
stone tablet, having the appearance of an unperforated
gorget, was found in midden material in the fill o:[ one of
the Smithport burials (Alto Focus). It is 2% by 13~ inches
in diameter. Polished pendants, sometimes natural pebbles
perforated near one end, are rare finds.
Bone, Shell, Copper, Galena, Quartz

No objects of shell, copper or galena have been found with
Bossier Focus burials, nor have there been surface finds of
objects made of these materials.
One bird bone which apparently had been made into a
bead was a surface find at the Smithport Landing. Unworked
quartz crystals or fragments are frequent; a small notched
crystal pendant (Plate 16, No. 7) came from the village surface at Greer Place.
Trait List o5 Bossier Focus

On the basis of the preceding discussion, it is considered
that the following list constitutes those culture traits which,
in the light of our present limited knowledge, probably
characterize the Bossier Focus:

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

137

COMMUNITY PLAN
Sedentary communities
Settlements typically on hillsides near minor streams, lakes or
springs; often on hills fronting the river valley
Mounds rare; occasionally small sand mound on hilltop overlooking valley; four mound Sites in river valley
Village usually rather compact and small
Often evidence of Archaic materials on same site
European trade materials not found unless Glendora component
represented
Burials on village site, scattered
One to four other cultures represented on same site

SUBSISTENCE

AND COMMERCE

Agriculture, hunting, fishing and gathering indicated
Materials largely local--no indication of widespread commerce
ARCHITECTURE
House floor on village---multiple post molds, apparently irregularly oval
Individual post molds
White sand on floor
Projecting entranceway, post rows
Multiple firebeds, not specially prepared
Cyst-like cache pit under ashbed (4 ft. depth, empty)
Post molds opposite sides of ashbed
House ovals on small mound; entrance uncertain; no central ashbed; no regular interior post molds; individual post molds

POTTERY
Clay temper predominates, occasional bone, tufa
Shell temper entirely or almost entirely missing
Highly polished engraved wares rare
Red filming, effigy vessels, rattle vessels, modeled animal heads
on bowl rims, spurred lines, negative discs--all absent or rare
Preponderance of incised, punctated, ridged and brushed utility

vessels
Everted rim jar usual shape for utility vessels
Bottles and bowl usual shape for engraved vessels
Pottery types---Maddox Band Engraved; Taylor Engraved; Pease
Brushed-lncised; Belcher Ridged; Sinner Linear Punctated; Dunkin Incised, late variant; Maddox Brushed
Other loci or periods represented by pottery at sites: iV~arksvilleTroyville; Coles Creek-Plaquemine; Alto; Belcher; Texarkana;
Glendora
Elbow pottery pipes, plain or engraved
Rectangular pottery pipe, incised
Perforated pottery discs
Pottery figurines, human (fragments)
Pottery trowel (?)
Bead from pottery sherd

CHIPPED STONE
Projectile points, large (possibly foreign)
Projectile points, small (some foreign))
Scrapers, small oval or triangular

138

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Drills, small flake, expanded base
Drills, small rectangular (resident?)
Albany type spokeshave and San Patrice concave base type
points (foreign?)
GROUND STONE

Celts
Small, thick triangular
Larger rectangular, thin or thick
Fully grooved axes (foreign?)
Two-hole gorget (rare, not a resident type?)
Oval manos
Rough sandstone metates or mortars
Pitted stones--numerous
Large and small hammerstones
Hones of brown sandstone
Bead, stone, pendant type (resident?)
Beads, tubular, stone (resident type?)
ANTLER, TOOTH, SHELL, COPPER, GALENA PRODUCTS

Information inadequate; none found in surface collections or
in few burials excavated
BONE, QUARTZ CRYSTAL
Bone Bead (resident?)
Quartz crystals, unworked
Quartz crystal pendant (resident?)
BURIAL CUSTOMS

Few burials found in various sites, detailed information not
available
Single burials in shallow pits
Fully extended burials, supine
Burials in village
No evidence of special preparation of pits or of specialized
burial ware
¯ Burial offerings lirnited--usually pottery, rare pipe
Pottery placed above or near head
No burial mounds in evidence
SKELETAL MATERIAL
Inadequate information for generalizations

Relationship to Other Cultures
Late Archaic. It has been noted that a group of culture
traits related to chipped and ground stone artifacts has
occurred at many of the hillside sites, along with Bossier
materials, also on similarly located non-pottery sites
throughout northwest Louisiana. These traits occur elsewhere in the Eastern United States in the late Archaic period
and have been the subject of careful study in Alabama,

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

139

Tennessee, Kentucky and south Louisiana. Evidences of
continuation of these Archaic traits into the early pottery
making periods are ample. The absence of Tchefuncte and
Poverty Point artifacts and the minimal amounts at Marksville-Troyville period sherds at Bossier Focus sites, in contrast with the regular distribution of Archaic objects,
suggests a late survival of the Archaic in northwestern
Louisiana, with possible carry over of Archaic traits into
the Alto-Bossier period. Only the evidence of extensive
testing and distributional studies at these sites, with stratigraphical control, will answer this question.
Tche~uncte. No artifacts which constitute marker traits
of the Tchefuncte culture have been recognized from Bossier
Focus sites. However, it has been noted that the pottery
type Sinner Linear Punctated bears more similarity in decoration technic and appearance, although completely different
in paste and vessel shape, to the linear punctated pottery of
the Tchefuncte Period than to any other pottery of the
lower Mississippi or Red River areas. Other incised and
nail punctated wares, together with rim notching, bear similarities with Tchefuncte technics which largely are missing
in intervening cultures (Marksville-Troyville-Coles Creek).
Although some Tchefuncte traits, especially in stone work,
projectile types and pottery traits, were transmitted to the
succeeding Marksville period, yet undoubtedly the well
organized Marksville groups effected spectacular changes
in the lower l~Iississippi and central Louisiana areas. Evidences of this are the development of large ceremonial,
mound building centers, the well developed burial complex
and introduction of new technics of pottery decoration. It
is interesting to speculate that other, as yet undiscovered,
pottery making peoples of the lower valley escaped domination of the Marksville-Troyville centers and carried on those
Tchefuncte methods of utility pottery decoration which reappear in Alto and Bossier potteries--overall fingernail
punctations, rim notching, linear punctations. Beyond this
speculation, for which there certainly is no basis of present
facts, it is fully indicated that Tchefuncte pottery was
"ancestral in large part to the predominantly smooth-sur-

140

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

faced wares that later came to dominate the Mississippi
Valley" (15).
MarksvilIe-Troyville. Despite the presence of a Marksville
site (Fredericks Place) in the Red River valley just below
the center of Bossier cultural development, and the finding
of a few distinctive sherds of stamped wares on Bossier sites,
there is little evidence of Marksville influence on the Bossier
pottery. The significance of the many multiple-side-notched
projectile points at the Sinner site is undetermined, especially since these seem to be infrequent in central Louisiana
Marksville and common on the Mid-Ouachita, with Marksville type pottery. This may be a local development in the
North Louisiana-Arkansas Marksville.
Coles Creek-Plaquemine. Incomplete publication of the
Louisiana State University materials leaves the Coles CreekPlaquemine situation unsettled. There seems little doubt
that the same close relationship exists between these cultures as between Marksville and Troyville, with certain
changes in community organization, pottery decoration, and
other artifact traits as Plaquemine developed out of Coles
Creek in central Louisiana. There are also indications that
the term "Coles Creek" relates to a time period with certain
artifact and cultural relationships between various units
over a wide area. Weeden Island is closely related but distinct; the Coles Creek potteries of central and north Louisiana are quite different and that of north Louisiana is dissimilar to the Pre-Caddo of the Crenshaw Mound.
Under these circumstances it is difficult to relate the AltoBossier developments to Coles Creek-Plaquemine. Krieger
(8) considers the earliest Alto (Phase 1) as preceding Coles
Creek of central Louisiana and probably Phase 2 at the Davis
Mound as coeval with "early Coles Creek," whereas Phase 3
is correlated with "late Coles Creek." As will be indicated
later, Bossier Focus is thought to have developed largely
out of late or Phase 3 Alto and we consider it probably contemporaneous with Plaquemine. On the Mississippi, Plaquemine is thought to precede and overlap Natchez. In the
middle Red and Mid-Ouachita River areas, Natchez pottery

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

141

is found with that of Belcher Focus and the historic Glendora Focus. We have already noted that Bossier Focus
seems to antedate Belcher Focus in northwest Louisiana.
Contemporaneity of Plaquemine and Bossier periods is
also indicated culturally in that almost identical incised and
brushed wares occur in both; vessel shapes are not too dissimilar; small projectile points, usually attributed to Coles
Creek-Plaquemine, occur on Bossier sites out of proportion
to or in the absence of pottery sherds of these two complexes;
and small drills made from flakes, which are not found in
Belcher or Glendora F’oci, seem to be common to Coles
Creek-Plaquemine and Bossier.
Ford and Willey’s report (14) of the Crooks site does not
clarify the relative position of the sherds which they list
together as "late period types." In Fig. 42 of this report,
types Sanson Incised, Catahoula Incised and Haynes Bluff
Plain, which probably would be assigned to the Plaquemine
period; Coles Creek Plain; Wilkinson Punctated, which we
now consider as a body treatment of several Alto types; and
Harrison Bayou Incised, which we would include in Dunkin
Incised, late variant, of the Bossier Period, all are ]isted as
found in the secondary mantle as well as in the wash on
the secondary mantle. No stratification of this mantle is
described and it is to be noted that about half of the Marksville Period sherds came from this same secondary mantle.
We also have no provenience indicated for illustrated sherds
which appear to be of types Sinner Linear Punctated (Fig.
19 a-d of the Crooks report) and Belcher Ridged (Fig. 20 g)
except that they belong to the late horizon.
Alto Focus. Repeated reference has been made to sherds
of A!to Focus types found on all sites in Louisiana and from
the majority of the McGee Bend Reservoir sites in Texas
at which Bossier Focus is represented. These specific Alto
types have been mentioned and illustrated by Krieger (6),
also have been discussed at conferences, but have not been
full described in the literature. Complete descriptions will
appear shortly in Krieger’s volume on the Davis site near
Alto, Texas, a large mound site which is one of the two

142

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

farthest southwest of the clay-sated tumuli which are so
characteristic of the Mississippi Valley.
Krieger correlates three Alto Focus (Gibson Aspect)
periods, Phases I, II and III, with premound, initial platform
mound and overlying mantle. In his previous publication (6)
he estimates Alto as beginning at approximately 1100-1200
A. D., at which time fine line engraved, black ware; tapering
spout bottles and incised scroll decoration were introduced
into this area. These types---Holly and Hickory Engraved
and Crockett Curvilinear Incised--lasted throughout all
phases of the Davis Mound and are represented in comparatively small amounts on the five sites which were listed as
major Alto sites in Northwest Louisiana-Wilkinson, Smithport, Allen, Colbert and Greer. Furthermore, 4 of the 5
vessels which Moore (1) and we (18) found in the tremendous Gahagan burial pits were of Holly Fine Engraved type
and three bottles found adjacent to the mound in recent
years, exposed by river caving and presumably but not
certainly with burials, were Hickory Fine Engraved.
Gahagan cannot be classed as belonging to Alto Focus, due
to its distinctive burials, stone and copper artifacts and
ceremonial traits. Krieger thinks the Alto burial pottery
may have been trade material, but considers Gahagan as
belonging to the early part of the Gibson Aspect.
Phases 2 and 3 of the Davis site mark the beginning of
considerable increase in amounts of straight line incised
pottery, often with fingernail punctated bodies which appear
on all of the Bossier Focus sites. Also, during Phase 3,
brushed sherds, which were related by Krieger to Plaquemine types, were found in relatively small amounts.
Krieger (8) suggests that in early Alto and other early Gibson periods, communities were few and widely separated, but
with large well developed ceremonial and civil centers. By
phase 3 times at Davis a trend had started which continued
throughout the entire Fulton Aspect, except in the large
mound sites on the Red River (especially Belcher and Texarkana Foci), toward living in many small villages which
seemed to have lost mound building, special burial and other

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

143

ceremonial traits. The cause for this dispersion into numerous small villages has not been ascertained--whether
natural causes related to sustenance, the breakup of strong
civil authority, rebellion against cruel burial ceremonials
with their attendant human sacrifice, or changed relationships with neighboring tribes.
Alto people spread during these times to many sites in
central east Texas, northwestern Louisiana and possibly
Arkansas---it is likely that hundreds of sites, mostly on the
smaller streams or in the hill country, have late Alto representation. In addition to pottery sherds, this is indicated
in our sampling by white sandstone hones and Alba Barbed
small projectiles. On these same dispersed sites, we see
development of the Bossier pottery complex alongside or
out of the Alto--chiefly the utility wares. Vessels from the
Smith Place burials (Plate 17) combine Alto Bossier shapes
and decorative elements. It is still not certain whether Alto
Focus is directly ancestral to Bossier (physically or culturally) or whether Bossier peoples, deriving cultural influences from both Coles Creek and Alto, coexisted with
Alto people in numerous villages during the latter phases
of Alto Focus. It seems certain that Bossier is generally
later than Alto, occupying an intermediate or transitional
period between characteristic Gibson (Alto) and Fulton
(Belcher) cultures. This is certainly the situation at the
Belcher site, the only excavated stratified site where Bossier
is represented.
Belcher Focus. We have noted that Belcher Focus artifacts are not widely represented on the many Alto-Bossier
hillside sites, also that Belcher Focus differs in continuing
the riverine, large ceremonial center, southern cult participating and mound building or using traditions of the Gibson
period, even though its pottery and artifact traits and trade
relationships place it in the Fulton period temporally.
Bossier and Belcher people seem to have had contact only
when the former entered the major river valley.
Yet we see two pottery types--Belcher Ridged and Taylor
Engraved--common to both loci, with evidence that the

144

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

former (and possibly both) originated in Bossier times.
Maddox Band Engraved bowls of Bossier Focus have shapes
and decoration arrangement not too different from Barkman
Engraved bowls of Belcher and Texarkana Foci. Utility
vessel shapes are quite similar in Bossier and Belcher potteries except for minor variation, as previously noted, in
rim height and treatment. Rim notching becomes less frequent. Small fiat triangular scrapers, brown sandstone
hones and Bassett Painted Stem small projectiles are other
Belcher artifacts which possibly also are Bossier Focus
traits.
Conclusions
Bossier Focus is a culture of the Caddoan area, primarily
found in numerous scattered hillside sites of Northwestern
Louisiana, but also in central East Texas, often in association with one to several other culture complexes on the same
site. There is a suggestion that part of the stone artifact
assemblage of this culture may have been carried over from
the late Archaic; evidence of usage of both atlatl and bow is
at hand. The Bossier pottery complex seems to derive from
the long sequence of Tchefuncte-Marksville-Troyville-Coles
Creek-Plaquemine of central Louisiana and the Alto Focus
of East Texas which, during its late period, spread across the
adjoining portions of East Texas and Northwest Louisiana.
Bossier Focus appears to precede and contribute in certain
pottery types and possibly other minor traits to the riverine
people of Belcher Focus, although close relationship does
not appear to exist.
The people responsible for Bossier Focus apparently were
hunters, fishermen and agriculturists living in small, closely
placed communities away from the major streams. Locally
self contained, they traded very little, were satisfied with
limited contacts and avoided highly developed ceremonials.
PLATE

17

Pottery from burials on Smith Place, Lincoln Parish.
Note the tapered
spout hottle with notched rim and encircling lines as well as pm~c~ateso
colnbining Al[o and Bossier decorative elements on a modified Hickory
EngPav(-d bottle shape. Also note ~’esssel 4, combining Dunkin Incised, Late
Varian| ,l;~ngra~,,i~g of the type seen in Plaq~emi~e a~d Alto vessels around
the rim, with notch,~d lip and Pease Brushed-Incised hod3" (Bossier Elements).
Vessels .x 1-3.

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

Plate 17

145

146

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

They produced several types of pottery, modifying ideas of
others and initiating at least one decorative technic which
they transmitted to a later cultural group, the remains of
which we know as Belcher Focus. This latter seems to be
immediately ancestral to Glendora peoples, identifiable as
Kadohadacho, Natchitoches and other historic Caddoan
groups.
There are frequent references in early narratives of certain "fringe" or unusual tribes among or near the Caddoans,
whose language or customs seemed different and who
usually lived away from the major streams on which Caddos
were found. Two of these "fringe" groups were the Adai,
near the Natchitoches in Louisiana, and the Eyeish, near the
Hasinai (on Eyeish creek, in the McGee Bend Reservoir) in
East Texas. Possibly ~uture research can establish whether
these isolated groups may represent descendants of Bossier
Focus peoples.
1560 Line Avenue,
Shreveport, Louisiana.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

(1)

Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River, J1.
Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1912.

(2) Idem, Antiquities o3 the Ouachita Valley, J1. Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1909.

(3)

Idem, Aboriginal sites in Louisiana and in Arkansas,
J1. Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1913.

(4)

Ford, J. Ao, Analysis o] Indian Village Site Collections
From Louisiana and Mississippi, Dept. of Conservation,
Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans, La., 1936,
Figs. 16, 18.

(5) Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,
Indian Notes and Monographs, the Heye Foundation,
New York, N. Y., 1920, Plates LVII b, XCVI a, possibly
LXXIX b.
(6) Krieger, Alex D., Culture Complexes in Northern Texas, Austin (University of Texas) Press, 1946.

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

147

(7) Stephenson, Robt. L., The McGee Bend Reservoir, to be
published.
(8) Krieger, Alex D., The Alto Focus, in print.
(9) Webb, C. tI., Evidences o~ Pre-Pottery Cultures in
Louisiana, Amer. Antiquity, VoI. 13, p. 230, 1948.
(10) Webb, C. H., House Types Among the Caddo Indians,
T.A.P.S. Vol. 12: pp. 49-75, 1940.
(11) Webb, C. It. and Dodd, Monroe, Jr., Pottery Types
From the Belcher Mound Site, T.A.P.So, Vol. 13, 1941,
pp. 92-95, Plate 15, nos. 3 and 5; Plate 16, nos. 1, 2,
(12) Idem, p. 101; Plate 17, no. 7.
(13) E:rieger, A~ex D., personal communication.
(14) Ford, J. A. and Willey, G., Crooks Site, Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans,
La., 1940, Fig. 20 g; page 58.
(15) Ford, J. A. and Quimby, G. I., 5r., The Tche]uncte Culture, An Early Occupation of the Lower Mississipp~
Valley, Amer. Antiquity Supplement, Vol. X, no. 3,
1945; plate 4; page 61.
(16) Hodges, T., personal communication.
(17) Webb, C. H., Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone
Artifacts From Northwest Louisiana, T.A.P.S., Vol.
1946.
(18) Webb, C. H. and Dodd, M., Further Excavations of the
Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida Culture,
T.A.P.S., Vol. 11, 1939.

148

Texas ArcheoIogica~ and Paleontological Society

RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
IN OKLAHOMA
ROBERT E.

BELL

During the past two years considerable archaeological
activity has been conducted throughout the state of Oklahoma. Thi~ has not been an extensive nor especially planned
program of development, but rather a sudden intensification
in archaeological work brought about by the various Federal
River Basin Reservoir projects. Most of the work accomplished has been survey or salvage work in an effort to
beat the bulldozer or rising flood waters to an important
site. No less than seven surveys have been completed, six
of them representing reservoir areas. Emergency excavations have been accomplished in two of the reservoirs, .and
small test trenches have been opened in newly discovered
sites relatively near the University.
In order to give you an idea as to what has been done, I
prefer to discuss these various projects separately, rather
than to attempt an overall summary statement.
There are three reservoir areas in which little of consequence was found--Canton Reservoir in western Oklahoma,
Hulah Reservoir in north central Oklahoma, and the Heyburn Reservoir in east central Oklahoma. In each of these
areas only occasional camp sites were noted by the survey
party, hence nothing in the way of excavations has been
contemplated for these localities. For once it has been a
pleasure not to find something, for this means our efforts
can be devoted to other localities and that little will be
lost in so far as the archaeological record is concerned.
Southwestern Oklahoma Survey
Mr. David Wenner conducted a survey in sections of
Harmon and Greer counties in the southwestern portion of
the state. The survey included portions of Salt Fork,
Prairie Dog Fork and the North Fork of Red River. A totaI
of 15 sites was recorded, two of them being extensive village

Recent ArchaeoIogical Research in Oklahoma

149

areas and the remaining thirteen representing smaller camp
sites.
No test excavations were attempted though surface collections indicated materials representing the Texas Henrietta focus. Some sherds resemble the Sanders materials,
and a few Pueblo sherds were reported from the area. No
Folsom or early man sites were noted. Excavations in this
region should be valuable in establishing cultural contacts
between the Pueblo area and Oklahoma.
Wister Reservoir
One of the more important archaeological areas within
the state falls within the Wister Reservoir in Le Flore
county. This reservoir lies in. the eastern part of the state
and includes rich archaeological sections of the Poteau and
Fourche Maline rivers. We have been fortunate in one
respect, however, for a large number of the sites known in
this area were excavated during the extensive W.P.A. operations a few years ago.
Out of a total of 32 sites within the Wister reservoir, 19
had been completely or partially excavated. It is from these
sites that we have the archaeological complex known as
Fourche Maline. Of the remaining 13 sites, 4 were tested
and one of these was selected for additional investigations.
This site is known as the Scott site, and it appears to be an
important example of the Fourche Maline culture.
The Scott site represents a midden deposit which has an
average thickness of about five feet in the deepest part. A
block about 20 feet by 30 feet wds carefully excavated by
arbitrary six inch levels in the thickest portion of the
midden. The site offers a clear transition from pre-pottery
to pottery bearing levels, the pottery being confined to the
upper portions 0f the midden. The final analysis of the Scott
site. should help to clear up somewhat the position of the
Fourche Maline culture and its general relationships to the
eastern Archaic horizons. Until this time we have had no
clear understanding as to the presence of pottery in what
otherwise appeared to be an Archaic or pre~pottery culture.

150

Te~:as Archeological and Paleontological Society

Work at the Scott site indicates that the Fourche Maline
complex should properly be subdivided into two periods--a
¯ pre-pottery and a pottery bearing period. The final outcome
of the Fourche Maline status can only await analysis of the
Scott and other excavated sites within that region. This
work has already been started.
Tenkiller Reservoir
During the past summer a survey was conducted in the
Tenkiller Reservoir along the Illinois river in eastern Oklahoma. A total of 38 archaeological sites were recorded, and
test pits were dug into the most promising of those discovered. The majority of the sites were non-pottery sites
and may represent an early Archaic horizon within that
locality. One site appears to represent the Spiro focus of
the Gibson aspect, and another the Fort Coffee focus of the
Fulton aspect. Some excavation work is anticipated in this
region during the coming summer.
Onapa and Canadian Reservoirs
In July and August, David Wenner directed a survey of
two reservoir areas near Eufala, Oklahoma; the Onapa Reservoir on Deep Fork, and the Canadian Reservoir on the
North Fork of the Canadian. Both areas were quite productive as far as archaeological materials are concerned.
A total of 41 sites were recorded for the Canadian Reservoir, many of these representing historic villages. The
Onapa Reservoir produced a total of 25 sites, again many of
them containing historic materials such as trade beads, gun
flints, broken china and crockery. Since this area is that
occupied by the Creek Indians in historic times it is surprising that these contact sites appear to be abundant. If
further work demonstrates that these sites are Creek, then
an interesting problem is presented. The aboriginal pottery
wares found on these sites are almost identical to three
wares associated with the Creeks in GeorgiaNWalnut
Roughened, Okmulgee Fields Incised, and Kasita Red filmed.
It has been thought that these historic wares found in
Georgia became extinct around 1750 and that they were

Recen~ Archaeological Research in Oklahoma

151

not made after that date. Since the Creeks did not enter
Oklahoma until 1830, the ~tate of 1750 for Georgia must be
in error. For it would hardly seem reasonable that the
Creeks suddenly revived three pottery wares that they had
not produced for 80 years. If the material is not Creek, then
we must account for some tribe within that region for
which we have no historical records.
Not all the sites in this region are historic, and sherd
collections suggest relationships to both the Gibson and
Fulton aspects.
Cedar Creek
One site representing early man has been noted just
north of Carnegie along Cedar Creek. Throughout the
gravels of the stream bed various types of projectile points
and also the bones and teeth of extinct animals can be
found. Typical Folsom points, Yuma like points and Plainview points have all been found. One can also find points
which are from later horizons, such as those which are
common on the Southern Plains. These materials appear
to be concentrated along a stretch of about two miles of
Cedar Creek and are apparently eroding out of the banks
as the rains wash away the soils. At this time we have been
unable to locate the original sources for the materials.
Several trips and some testing of the river terraces have
produced no results to date; however, we are constantly
hopeful that we can locate some specimens in situ and
establish the archaeological position of these various types.
Lee-Bowen and Brown Si~es
Two sites have been located within short driving distance
of the University. These are located on the Washita river to
the southwest of Norman. At various week-end intervals,
students in anthropology participate in test excavations at
these sites. Although no extensive work has been done,
we have learned a great deal about these two village sites.
At the Lee-Bowen site in Garvin county, an L-shaped
trench, 25 feet on each side has been excavated. This, trench
cut across three refuse or storage pits so that considerable

152

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

cultural material was recovered.

Dr. Schmitt has prepared

a statement on this site, and considers it to be an example
of the hunting~agricultural economy existing in the Low
Plains in late prehistoric times.
The Brown site is located about 15 miles westward from
the Lee-Bowen site along the Washita river in Grady county.
A smaller area has been tested but considerable material
has been recovered.

The types of artifacts from the Brown

site generally resemble those from Lee-Bowen; however,
there are some specific differences.
Both of these sites have certain features which resemble
the Texas Henrietta focus; there are also many features
which resemble other sites in Garvin county along the lower
Washita. In all probability both of these sites will eventually be grouped into a Washita focus which is related to the
Texas Henrietta focus to the south and to the Paint Creek
focus in Kansas to the north.

No correlation with historic

tribes is possible at the present time.
Fort Gibson Reservoir
The Fort Gibson Reservoir is located in the northeastern
section of the state along the lower section of Grand river.
The survey has reported a total of 26 sites from this area,
two of them being important mound groups and the remainder representing village or camp areas.

Some non-

pottery sites were found which may represent an early
Archaic horizon somewhat similar to that noted for the
Illinois River area.
During the past summer extensive excavations were conducted at the Norman site within this reservoir. Previous
work at this site indicated that it represented the Spiro focus
of the Gibson aspect.

Since one large conical mound re-

mained unexplored at this site, it was considered necessary

Recent Archaeological Research in Oklahoma

153

that it be examined in order to place our understanding of
the Spiro focus materials on a more secure foundation. Excavations at this site were conducted as a cooperative project
between the Smithsonian Institution and the University of
Oklahoma.
Some limited excavations were conducted in the village
area where portions of several houses and refuse pits were
uncovered.

Our major efforts, however, were

directed

toward the large conical mound.
This mound was the largest of a group of six, and it
measured approximately 27 feet high and 90 feet in diameter.
Excavation was not complete although sufficient knowledge
of its contents had been gained to consider our work at this
mound as completed.

The mound proved to be a domicil-

liary sub-structure mound with no less than six construction
phases represented. A series of five flat topped mounds had
been built one on top of the other, the last of these having
been capped with a cone-shaped mantle.

Although very

little in the way of artifact material was recovered, the
mound is interesting for several reasons.

The feature of

placing a conical capping over the last occupation ’ surface
appears unusual~. Glass trade beads were found within the
upper mantle. The mound is circular in outline rather than
square or rectangular as in most sub-structure mounds.

In

addition, the construction periods were marked only by a
heightening of the mound, not a general enlargement of the
structure.

Each addition was merely placed upon the old

occupation surface and did not include the sides of the
mound. This again appears unusual for this type of mound.
Analysis of this material is now in progress and a report
should be available in the near future.
A second mound group, the Harlin site, contains seven
mounds,

and at the

present

time

remains

untouched.

154

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

Present plans include excavations at this site during the
coming summer.

It, too, apparently represents the Gibson

aspect--probably Spiro focus.
Summary
If something in the way of a summary statement were
made, it would include the fact that 172 new archaelogical
sites have been recorded. These sites appear to range in age
from Paleo-Indian materials represented by Folsom up to
historic villages of living tribes now found in Oklahoma.
Excavations have shed additional light upon the Fourche
Maline complex, the Spiro focus and the more recent
Washita River remains.

We have a better idea as to the

distributions of various cultures which will help in understanding the role of Oklahoma in American prehistory. Last,
but not least, we know the types of sites that are to be
inundated by reservoir areas, and we know where immediate
excavations should be done. Getting this work done remains
for the future.

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

155

IMPORTANCE OF
THE "GILMORE CORRIDOR" IN CULTURE
CONTACTS BETWEEN MIDDLE AMERICA
AND THE EASTERN UNITED STATES’
ALZX D. I~UE~Ea
For more than a century, students of archaeology have
theorized about prehistoric connections between the high
civilizations of Mexico and Central America, and the agricultural, mound-building Indians of the Eastern United
States.

While it is generally

agreed that the

know-

ledge of agriculture had to be carried into the United States
from Middle or South America, there is little agreement on
just what other culture traits were introduced with agriculture, or during subsequent periods. The practice of
mound building is often mentioned, as are various forms of
polished pottery, artifacts suggesting ritualistic uses, and-by inference--complex ceremonies dedicated to the earth,
sun, fertility, etc., and various religious and civil offices in
complex social systems.
For the most part, it is very difficult to present definite
archaeological evidence for the introduction of traits other
than agricultural from the Middle American civilizations.
There is no escaping the probability that culture borrowing
occurred, very likely at different times and from different
Middle American areas, and affecting various parts of the
Eastern United States in varying degrees, but we are just
beginning to achieve the necessary controls over culture
complexes and their chronological relationships to see these
problems in perspective. For one thing, "mound building"
is not a single trait, there being several kinds of mounds in
the Eastern States as a whole, erected for different purposes
and representing several distinct periods of development.
1 Baaed on an address to the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society at
its annual meetinz. October 25, 1947. in Lubbock. Texas. Publication was deferred
one year when it was found that the 1947 Bulletin had sufficient material. Several
passages have been re-w-xltten and exvanded.

156

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

Thus, "burial mounds" were sometimes erected as protective
caps over a large grave, log tomb, or crematory basin, and
may contain nothing within the mound material itself;, other
"burial mounds" may contain village refuse and graves dug
downward into the mound.

"Temple mounds" may have

square or rectangular flat tops on which important buildings
were erected or ceremonies performed, or they may be oddshaped, or consist of several terraced platforms; some contain
the remains of houses, and even burials, subsequently covered when new additions were made to the mound. Generally speaking, the low round, more or less conical mounds
were used in connection with disposal of the dead and occur
~n earlier culture horizons in the Eastern United States than
do the flat-topped "temple mounds," although when the
latter appear, the burial-mound trait sometimes continues
along with them.
I have never understood why archaeologists so often
speak of "mound buil~ling" having been introduced into the
Eastern States from the Middle American civilizations,
without specifying which kind of mound is meant. At the
same time, nearly all accept the Asiatic origin of cord-impressed Woodland pottery, and many other traits of the
Woodland culture. Since conical burial mounds, built over
graves, log tombs, or cremations, like cordmarked Woodland
pottery, are found very widely in Asia, it would seem rather
obvious that one cannot speak simply of "mounds" being
derived from Middle America. On the other hand, there
are reasons for believing that the erection of flat-topped,
more or less pyramidal, mounds of clay in the Eastern United
States was due to an initial stimulus from some part of Middle America: it is very difficult to state which part, or at
which time, for no survey of the purely clay mounds has
been made in the southern countries even though they occur
very widely.2
2 Attentlon has always been directed toward the more spectacular mounda with
stone facing, a~d the ~ram~ of stone ~n Midge ~erica, rather th~

entirely of cJay. ~though the lair we~ ~ quite common and ~robably
considerable t~me s~an. Stone was never us~ in or on the mounds of the Uni~
S~t~ as a building materia].

Importance of the "’Gilmore Corridor"

157

In the field of pottery-making, there may also be said to
have been two major, very widespread traditions existing
over long periods of time in the eastern half of the United
States, including much of the Great Plains region. These
are: (1) the afore-mentioned Woodland pottery, devoted
very largely, if not entirely, to cooking vessels, taller than
wide, with their bottoms pointed, convex, or fiat, and the
surfaces roughened by the use of cord-wrapped paddles in
shaping the walls; and (2) a much more complex tradition
including many forms of polished bowls, bottles, and beakers,
and smoothed-over cooking jars, many of them decorated
in a wide variety of techniques such as incising, engraving,
punctating, applique elements, and modeling in effigy forms.
Where the cultures producing these potteries mingled, the
ceramic styles influenced one another in various ways, but
the main contrasts are fairly definite. The first tradition
(Woodland) belongs generally to the more northern regions
such as the northern and central Great Plains, Great Lakes,
Northeast, and Middle West, while the second (Mississipplan) belongs to the middle and lower valleys of the Mississippi River basin and the Southeastern States from the
southern Great Plains to the Atlantic Ocean.
Again, we know little as to the time or place of the original entry of either tradition into the United States. The
Woodland is commonly regarded as much the earlier of the
two, and in both cases there is a distinct tendency at present
to set the dates farther back than has been the vogue during
the last fifteen or twenty years. Thus, the earliest Woodland
culture, probably non-agricultural, could hardly have appeared as late as 500 A. D., as many have claimed, but is now
thought to date closer to 500 or even 1000 B.C. The Mississippian cultures, long thought to have appeared no earlier
than 1000 or even 1200 A.D. (even as late as 1400 A. D. by
some), are being pushed back some centures although there
is as yet no concrete evidence for a date earlier than roughly
500 A. D.3 The Mississippian cultures were positively horti3 Many :~actors must be considered in any such e~timate.
These, and the ~n~tire ~te, a~ discu~d by the wrier in a ~ubli~tion entitl~ "The G~rge C. Davis
Si~, Che~k~ ~unty, Texas," by H. Pe~ Newell and Alex D. Kri~r, ~ be i~u~

in 1949 ~ a Memoir of the ~ for Amer~n A~h~lo~,

158

Texas Archeological and PaleontoIogical Society

cultural, and there is evidence of farming in some of the
relatively late Woodland communities, such as those of the
Hopewell culture. As to whether agriculture was introduced into the Eastern United States before any truly Mississippian culture appeared, or whether agriculture first
appeared with the Mississippian cultures and then spread
northward and was adopted by the later Woodland cultures,
there is difference of opinion and either theory has possibilities. It would be tempting to deduce that the first practice
of agriculture, centered around corn, temple-mound building, the complex tradition of Mississippian pottery-making,
as well as various fertility cults and perhaps civil and
religious structures were all introduced at about the same
time from some Middle American source and spread widely
over the East, eventually affecting the more northerly or
Woodland peoples as well. I believe most archaeologists
favor such an interpretation, but caution demands that we
proceed only so fast as archaeological data permit. The facts
necessary to valid interpretations emerge slowly, for enormous areas are involved and there is never enough excavation. However, steady progress is evident and before many
years we should be able to gather enough data and ideas to
present sound correlations.
In the past few years the dating of Mississippian cultures
has been aided to some extent by studies carried eastward
across Texas from the Southwestern United States;" where
tree-ring dating has produced, with great labor, a generally
reliable scale. These projections, and geological studies,
have also cast much light on the age of non-pottery cultures
in central Texas.~ The pottery-bearing cultures of the central Great Plains have similarly been brought into chronological perspective through their relationships with the
dated Southwestern horizons and those of north Texas.~
The extension of dates from the relatively well-established
4 A. D. Krieger, Culture Comple~es and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas Publication, No. 4640, 1946 ; and The Eastward Extension of Puebloan
Datings Toward Cultures of the Mississippi Valley. American Antiquit:~, Vol. 12,
pp. 141-:148, 1947.
5 J. Charles Kelley, The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the
Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity, VoL 13, ]pp. 97-109, 1947.
6 Waldo R. Wedel, Culture Chronolo~-y in the Central Great Plains, American
Antiquity, Vol. 12, ]pp. 148-156, 1947.

Importance o] the "Gilmore Corridor"

159

Mexican and Mayan cultures, northward around the Gulf
coast, has proved more difficult because the few "trade"
objects have either been found in uncertain circumstances,
or have proved difficult to date in terms of Mexican archaeology. When objects of Middle American origin can be
more accurately placed and dated in Texas and adjacent
states, they will also aid in attaining better chronologies for
cultural developments in the Eastern States, at least in the
western portions and the Mississippi Valley.
Another important matter is that archaeologists no longer
insist quite so strongly that all borrowing between these
provinces was in one direction. Where it has long been
assumed that all "higher" traits in the Eastern States were
derived from Middle America, it is now granted that some
may have passed the other way.7 This, of course, depends
upon the strength of such contacts as took place, and further
knowledge of how the comparable artifacts are to be dated
in both regions; if improved datings show them to belong
many centuries apart and the gaps cannot be filled, the
resemblances may prove to be superficial and not the result
of culture borrowing in either direction.
Possible Routes Of Contact
Speculations on the route or routes by which Middle
American and Mississippian cultures were in contact, or
along which migrations may have taken place, generally
include Texas, it being insisted that when more is known of
Texas archaeology, such "routes" wil! become evident.
Presumably, they should reveal agricultural practices, probably accompanied by temple-mound building, the making
of potteries traceable to Middle American peoples, and specialized artifacts or ritualistic paraphernalia of such definite
form that their origins would be clear. The following routes
are generally considered most likely:
1. The Gulf coast littoral and coastal plain of Texas,
traverse being by land, or boat, or both.
7 Richard S. Maclqeish, A Preliminary
American Antiquity, Vo]. 13, pp. 1-15, 1947.

Report on

Coastal

Tamaulipas,

Mexi~,

160

Texas ArcheoIog$cal and Paleontological Society

2. Across the Gulf of Mexico by boat from the Mexican
east coast or Yucatan peninsula to the mouths of the Mississippi, thence probably some distance up the river.
3. A long interior route through northern Mexico into the
Southwestern States or extreme western Texas, thence eastward across the southern Plains.
4. Through the West Indies to Florida and inland to the
north and west.
There is, of course, no need to settle on any one such route
to the exclusion of the others. More than one may have been
used, simultaneously or at different times. As for (2), there
is no evidence for it, but since some coastal Indians of
IvIiddle America are known to have make long trips by canoe,
it will always be an intriguing possibility. Routes (3) and
(4) are the subject of research by others; my present impressions are that the diffusion of culture elements by either of
them may have provided relatively late accretions rather
than such fundamental practices as agriculture, building of
temple mounds, and rituals connected with agriculture.
This leaves (1), the Gulf coast of Texas, as a short and
seemingly feasible route of contact. We shall examine it
briefly and then turn to a parallel route farther inland
which has received almost no attention.
The Gulf Coast
Due to conditions not generally appreciated by those
unfamiliar with its geography, the coastal fringe of Texas
and Tamaulipas presents certain difficulties in the location of
archaeologica! sites. Excavations have been few and far
between, but at least 100 sites are known,e Along the
southern end of the Texas coast, and the northern Tamaulipas coast, the shorelines and adjacent land are now undergoing almost constant change due to the cutting back of
8 T. ~. Campbell, The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aran~as Focus of the Texaa
Coast (this Bulletin, Vol. 18, pp. 40-75, 1947) presents the best and virtually the only
report on a controlled excavat2on along this coast He review~ the ~orevious literature
and states that through the non-pottery Aran.~m.s Focus, "It is bolted thereby to
establish at least one reference roint in the archaeology of the Texas coast’~
He is
also organizing all availahle data on the archaeology of this coast for further
publications.

Importance o:f the "Gilmore Corridor"

161

off-shore islands by landward winds and tides; sand is lifted
from the island fronts and the mainland shores, being carried
inland and dropped in the lagoons or added to the active
dune fields on the mainland2

Hurricanes often accelerate

this process, in at least "one case churning up and cutting
back the sandy shore some 50 feet in a single day.’° Although
the northern end of the 100-mile long Padre Island is relatively well watered and supports enough grass for cattle
grazing, the southern end presents such desert conditions
that winds and storms have literally moved it shoreward
since 1881 by removing sand from its Gulf front and depositing it in the Laguna lYIadre, which is filling to such an extent
that it is only a few inches deep in places.,1
These conditions make it highly probable that archaeological sites on the exposed shoreline (usually the seaward
sides of the great off-short islands, but also including unprotected segments of the mainland) have been largely
destroyed. Thus, direct evidence of canoe travelers along
the outer shores is almost impossible to find.’2 On the other
hand, the sand and clay mantles of aeolian origin in the
lagoons and the mainland shores have undoubtedly covered
many other sites, now occasionally exposed in the sides of
erosion gullies in the dunes. Pottery-bearing camp sites are
sometimes found on the modern surfaces, but are thought
to date generally within the last 500 years. The buried sites,
so far as known, are non-pottery, and since many are being
exposed simultaneously by surface (rain) erosion and shoreline cutting, they should be excavated before disappearing
forever.
9 W. Armstrong Price and Gordon Gunter, Certain Recent Geelogl~al and Biological Changes in Soath Texas. with Consideration of Probable Causem Proceedings and
transactions of the Texa~ Academy of Science, vv. 3-21, 1942.
10 The late A. :~. Anderson of Brownsville, Texa~, was an unsua]ly keen observer, making extensive and well documented archaeological collections in the
soi~thern tip of Texas and northern Tamaulipas. His notes describe the tremendous
shoreline destruction after a single hurricane at the Boca San Jose, Tamaulipas,
virtually obliterating all archaeological evidence in the vicinity.
11 Price and Gunter, op. cit.
12 At least four dugout canoes have been found on the sh~re~ of Padre and
Mustang Islend~, possibly suggesting Indian travel. However, "~hey could not have
been preserved any great length of time, no camp sites or other cultural remains
have been found near them, and ocean currents may have been entirely responsible
for del)ositing the canoes on these shores from very distant points.
Chunks of
pumice from Mexico and perhaps even the West Indies are very common on the island
and lagoon beaches, having floated great distances.

162

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

These most unfavorable conditions are, however, principally found in what is now a semi-arid climatic zone extending from the northern side of Baffm Bay, Texas (about
100 miles north of the Rio Grande mouth), southward to the
Rio Soto la Marina (about 150 miles south of the Rio Grande
mouth). This zone is termed DB’d by Thornthwaite,,3 who
bases his distinctions on precipitation effectivity rather than
on gross annual precipitation; thus DB’d is semi-arid, mesothermal, and precipitation is deficient in all seasons. On the
coasts of Texas and Tamaulipas this semi-arid corridor is
about 250 miles wide but away from the coast it expands
enormously over northern Mexico and southwestern Texas.
On the coastal plain the annual rainfall is now between 25
and 30 inches in this corridor, decreasing to 20 inches ab.out
100 miles westward, and to 15 inches still farther into .the
interior (Plate 18).
Proceeding northward and northeasward along the Texas
coast, rainfall increases quite uniformly in gross terms and
in terms of its effectivity. From Baffin Bay to a point between Copano and San Antonio Bays lies Thornthwaite’s
CB’d zone .(sub-humid, mesothermal, precipitation deficient
in all seasons). From the latter point to just south of the
Brazos River mouth is the CB’r zone (sub-humid, mesothermal, precipitation adequate in all seasons), in which
annual rainfall is between 35 and 45 inches; and from the
latter point to the Louisiana border at Sabine Lake is the
BB’r zone (humid, mesothermal, precipitation adequate in
all seasons), with rainfall over 45 inches, over 50 inches
beyond Sabine Lake. It will be noted (Plate 18) that these
climatic borders run roughly at right angles to the Texas
coast, then turn northward to extend far into the interior
of the United States.
Southward from the Rio Soto la Marina in Tamaulipas,
virtually the same succession of climatic zones occurs along
the Gulf coast of Mexico, but in this direction the precipitation (both gross and effective) increases much more rap13 C. Warren Thornthwaite, The Climates of North America According to a New
Classification, Geographical Review, Vol. 21, pl). 633-56, 1931, Plate III.

Importance o] the "Gilmore Corridor"

163

idly than in Texas in the opposite direction; hence the zones
are much narrower. A B!k’r zone (hurffid, tropical, precipitation adequate in all seasons) is reached in Veracruz state
about 200 miles south of the Soto la Marina, and continues
around the Gulf into the Yucatan peninsula.
Two questions naturally arise for the archaeologist: (1)
What effects would the present climates of southern Texas
and Tamaulipas have had on native economies, communication, and the diffusion of agriculture and other advanced
traits? (2) .Has climate been stable during the whole time
of development of agricultural civilizations in Mexico and
the United States (as well as the New World in general)
up to the present? Certainly the many speculations on
culture contacts and diffusions between the various major
regions have always been made in a climatic vacuum--as
though climate and land resources had always been just as
we now see them.
The Thornthwaite classification, based on effectivity of
precipitation, is far more valuable for practical economics
than mere statistics on rainfall. In the region under consideration, 35 inches annual precipitation falling in all seasons
appears to be the critical boundary between deficient (d)
and adequate moisture (r) for raising of crops without
artificial means of supplying water. In other regions, such
as the arid Southwest, far less precipitation is needed for
effectivity because most of it falls in the seasons of direct
benefit. On the Gulf coast, the DB’d and CB’d climates, at
least, would have made native agriculture without irrigation practically impossible over an area roughtly 400 miles
wide along the coast (about 200 miles on either side of the
Rio Grande); and due to the fanning out of these zones
toward the interior, the unfavorable area would increase
to 600 or 700 miles across, and even more in the deep interior
of north Mexico and western Texas.
This does not mean that the DB’d and CB’d zones are
barren or waterless--far from it. Vast areas of grass and
mesquite are contained in them, with some oak along the
water courses, and innumerable ponds and lakes of drink-

!64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

able water are to be found along the Gulf littoral, even on
the off-shore islands. Small game, deer, perhaps antelope,
peccaries, great numbers of water fowls, fresh and salt
water fishes, shell fish, mesquite beans, Opuntia fruit, and
doubtlessly other foods would supply a considerable if not
abundant subsistence under present conditions. That the
ecological balance is in very delicate adjustment, however,
is shown by the tremendous damage to plant and animal life
on the coastal plain between Kingsville and Raymondville,
Texas, during the droughts of the early 1880’s and 1896-1903.
This is the area in which active dune fields are now found,
and since historical records suggest that it was a verdant
plain in the middle 19th century, the present dune activity
probably resulted from the recent droughts mentioned.,Similar shifts, perhaps of longer duration and more widespread, have undoubtedly occurred before. At any rate, the
semi-arid zones as they stand now, with their scanty and
erratic summer rain, are far from uninhabitable but would
provide an effective barrier several hundred miles wide to
the spread of native argriculture without irrigation.
The next question is whether climate has varied sufficiently in the past two or three millenia to expand or contract
this non-agricultural gap. The current researches of Dr.
Price, in which the writer and Dr. T. N. Campbell have
assisted, will provide much significant data on this matter.
The number of recent climatic fluctuations and their dates
have not been fully determined, but there is much to indicate that some, at least, have been of sufficient intensity to
narrow and widen the semi-arid zones. Such fluctuations
would, of course, be most evident in the driest or most
critical zones, but should also have affected the adjacent
sub-humid and humid zones to some extent.
It is possible that during considerably moister periods the
DB’d and CB’d zones disappeared temporarily along the
coast, in which case it could be argued that prehistoric
cultures based on agriculture could have spread around the
Gulf coast. However, there is no archaeological evidence of
14 Price and Gunter, op. cir.,

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

165

any such diffusion at any time, and the northern limits of
Middle American culture seem never to have passed the
lower Rio Soto la Marina, i. e., the present southern limit
of the DB’d climatic zone. In the Tampico area about 85
miles farther south, Ekholm has defined six ceramic periods
which may be correlated with virtually the whole known
sequence of ceramic cultures in Middle America.,~ It is
difficult to state how much of the sequence at Tampico is
represented as far north as the Rio Soto la Marina. MacNeish has shown that some of the latest types of pottery in
the Tampico sequence, those associated with the Huastecan
tribes, occur on camp sites along the coastal fringe as far
north as the vicinity of Brownsville on the Texas side of the
Rio Grande.’6 The writer would disagree with him in that
this pottery demonstrates the northward extension of
PIuastecan culture, for the pottery may have been entirely
obtained from tIuastecan peoples living no farther north
than the Soto la Marina. Further surveys will undobutedly
clarify these matters.
Climatic factors were probably partly responsible for the
failure of the Middle American province to be extended
farther north, but if climate had been more favorable in
times past, there must have been other reasons as well. The
Middle American cultures certainly did not reach the
Huasteca region in any form as well developed or vigorous
as in the great cities of central Mexico and the tropics of
southern Mexico and Yucatan; this attenuation toward the
north may have been accompanied by a disinclination to
push still farther north. Also, the coastal strip of Tamaulipas and Texas could hardly have been very inviting to
agricultural peoples because of its low, marshy topography,
"heavy" soils, and such territory may already have been
occupied by tribes unreceptive to influence. The accounts
of Cabeza de Vaca and other early explorers emphasize
again and again that the coastal peoples of Texas were warlike and unfriendly to all strangers, Europeans and other
1~; Gordon F. Ekho|m, Exeavatlons at Tampico and Panu©o in the Huasteea,
Mexico, Ame~n Muse~ of Na~ral Hist., Anthro~l~i~ Pave~, ~oI. 38,
PL 5, 1944.

166

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Indians as well.

It was unsual for American natives to

treat Europeans as bitter enemies from the start.
Proceeding eastward around the Texas Gulf coast, precipitation increases uniformly, and the effects of wind
erosion correspondingly decrease; the more stable vegetation cover prevents the coverage of sites by dunes, and
extensive shell heaps have accumulated around the lagoon
and bay shores. The exposed outer coast has undoubtedly
been cut backward to some extent by winds and tides,
destroying sites facing the open Gulf waters, but probably
to a less extent than along the southern reaches.
Theoretically, the CB’r or moist sub-humid zone of
Thornthwaite would be suitable for native agriculture, but
there is no satisfactory evidence that it ever was practiced in
this zone in southern Texas,,7 any more than in the. zones
previously discussed. Still farther east, the BB’r zone,
humid, with over 45 inches annual precipitation, conforms
more or less with the heavy forest of eastern Texas. The
great pine belt does not extend quite as far west as the
present BB’r boundary (Plate 18). In northeastern and cen-tral-eas.t Texas the village sites of pre-Columbian agricultural
and pottery-making Mississippian tribes (the latest of which
were Caddoans) correspond rather well with the area of
pine forests. However, along the southeastern Texas coast,
and for some !00 rnfles inland, there is as yet no more direct
evidence for agriculture (in the form of charred remains of
domestic plants) than along the rest of the Texas coast. The
absence of large village sites and temple mounds in this
area also contrasts with the Mississippian cultures farther
inland. On the other hand, pottery does occur on many shell
and midden heaps, and the soils in wooded areas back from
the grassy and marshy coastal strip are loose and easily
tilled; hence it is quite possible that some agriculture
actually was practiced, if only to a limited degree. With
plenty of game, fish, shell fish, nuts, and other wild foods,
17 It is cer~in that corn agriculture was practiced in this and the CB’d zone
in north.central Texas, in the upper Brazos and Red River valleys and b~tweem See
Krieger, Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas, sectioas on ]F~enrtetta
Focus.

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

167

agriculture may have been no more than a supplementary
pursuit; the archaeologist simply desires more direct proof.
In very similar surroundings, the later peoples of nearby
southern Louisiana undoubtedly did raise crops of corn,
perhaps other plants as well.
As to travel along the Texas coast, this could have been
done easily by boat. We simply have no means of proving
that it was an important means of communication. By land,
there would have been no serious physical barriers, but
anyone desiring to make long trips would have had to pass
around numerous large bays and lagoons reaching far inland,
necessitating a great deal of extra mileage.

At the eastern

end, travel around Galveston Bay and Sabine Lake would
have presented no great difficulty unless the Trinity, Neches,
or Sabine River, or any of several large bayous, was in flood.
At such times, water spreads for miles through dense woods
and matted, jungle-like undergrowth which is difficult
enough to cross when dry, and almost, impossible to wade,
swim, or push a boat through when flooded. Such conditions
last for weeks.
In summary, the Texas and-Tamaulipas coasts present a
very negative picture in respect to the diffusion of agricultural practices from the Middle American province toward
the Mississippi Valley. Even in allowing for past shifts in
climatic boundaries, we still do not find any archaeological
evidence for agriculture at any time along the entire coast
from the Rio Soto la Marina around to southeastern Texas,
where the growing of domestic crops was possibly present,
but if so, the practice could well have spread westward from
Louisiana. Neither do we see the slightest evidence of influences from Middle American cultures on the coast of Texas
north of the Rio Grande delta, and by this I mean influences
that modified the nativ~ cultures. Individuals or small
parties could, and undoubtedly did, pass along the coast
from time to time, either for purposes of trade or to visit
far-off lands for the same reasons that human beings have
always felt compulsion to "look around."

168

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The "’Gilmore Corridor"
In 1935, Dr. Melvin R. Gilmore of the University of
Michigan Ethnobotanical Laboratory becaxne interested in
the possible routes by which native agriculttu-e had been
introduced into the Eastern United States. The late Elmer
Johnson, economic geographer at the University of Texas,
informed me that in 1935 Dr. Gilmore spent several months
in Austin and other parts of Texas, collecting botanical specimens and exploring the agricultural problem. The only
published statement of his thoughts in this connection is a
very brief one.,~ Its substance is that the coastal belt was
unsuitable in several ways, while a more plausible one lay
farther inland. This, the undulating prairie belt between
the low coastal plain and the Edwards Plateau uplift, he
called the "Gilmore Corridor." This prairie was very easy
to travel, being open grassland for the most part, but crossed
by numerous rivers from the Texas interior, and streams
arising from springs in the Edwards Plateau margin or
Balcones Escarpment. The bottoms of all these streams are
well wooded with oak, pecan, walnut, hickory, gum, cypress,.
hackberry, persimmon, and many other trees, but are narrow
and not choked with excessive undergrowth. Land game,
fish, and water fowls, not to mention many vegetal foods,
would provide ample subsistence. Dr. Gilmore believed
that native agriculture had been practiced in these numerous
bottomlands, presumably from Mexico entirely across Texas,
at least in this "Corridor." He does not state where it begins
or ends.
It may be seen in Plate 18 that in southern and central
Texas this corridor crosses the present climatic zones DB’d
(semi-arid), CB’d (dry sub-humid), and CB’r (moist subhumid). We have seen that the first is too dry for native
agriculture without irrigation, chiefly because of the scanty
and erratic summer rain. The second now provides sufficient
summer rain in much of central Texas for corn crops on the
prairies and bottomlands, although they are not infrequently
destroyed by summer droughts of several weeks duration.
18 Science News Letter, June 29, 1935, p. 419.

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

169

50"+

/

/

PLATE IS
Texas and adjoining areas, showing zones of preclpit~tlon effec~vlty
(after Thornthwaite) ~nd general position of "Gilmore Corridor," according
to the author’s interpretation.
Dr. Gilmore did not specify the limits of
the "’dorridor" through which he thought agriculture h~l been diffused.
Agricultural Indians are known to h~ve occupied the humid zone east of
the pine frontier, and much of northern Texa~, in pre-Columbtan times,
but evidence has not been found for agriculture between the Rio Soto ia
Marina and this eastern pine frontier.
Note that in most of Texas the
precipitation boundaries run at right angles to the coast, but in the lower
Rio Grands region rainfall decreases inland in zones parallel to the coast.

170

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Conditions are more favorable in the moist sub-humid zone
farther east, nearly all of it now being successfully farmed
without irrigation; occasionally, however, as in the present
year, deficient rainfall results in great damage to some crops
while aiding others, such as cotton.
Spealdng generally, there is no apparent factor at present
which would have prohibited Indian farmers from successfully growing corn, beans, or squash on the central Texas
bottomlands and terraces in most years, had they desired
to do so. Many hundreds of camp sites are known in the
Edwards Plateau region and along the Gulf-ward flowing
streams in the "Corridor." They are largely characterized
by great accumulations of burned limestone hearth rocks,
fractured by heat (the "burnt-rock middens"), in and around
which are found enormous numbers of flint artifacts, manos,
and m~]l~ng stones used with rotary motion.,~ These sites,
unless divided by stream sediments, give every appearance
of more or less sedentary occupation by small groups who
may have lived on them for centuries, scouring the surrounding country for game, fish, and plant foods. A
thorough survey of economic resources and their exploitation, population density and length of occupation of favored
sites, etc., would form a most interesting study even though
exact data may never be obtained,zo We may be safe in
stating that i~ agriculture were ever practiced in central
Texas in pre-Columbian times, it was probably in a distinctly supplementary capacity because of the fairly rich
natural food resources.
If it could be demonstrated that crops were raised in the
"Gilmore Corridor," say a thousand years ago or more, this
information would provide an important link in the spread
of agriculture from northern Mexico in the general direction
of the humid BB’r zone (Plate 18) and the eastern woodlands
19 Kelley, op. clt., (note 5) has recently outlined the distinctive tra~ts and distribution of the Round Rock and Glear Fork Foci in the Abilene and Edwards Plateau
regions, and the Uvalde Focus in the general Nuec¢~ River area.
20 The writer is indebted to Glen L. Evans of the Tex~ Memorial Museum for
many stimulating conversations along this line.
Evans and Grayson E. Meade have
recently conducted excavations in southwestern Texas, partly to gain some insight into
these interesting economic problems of the pas~.

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

beyond.

171

However, this proof is not at hand, and even i] it

were, it would not serve to close the non-agricultural gap,
only to reduce it somewhat. A broad belt of semi-arid DB’d
climate on both sides of the lower Rio Grande would still
mark, so far as any archaeological evidence reveals, a permanently non-agricultural gap some hundreds of miles wide.
Its width may have varied from time to time, but even so,
the problem o~ how and when agricultural knowledge
reached the Eastern United States would remain the same,
and the argument would be reduced to whether it is more
likely that this knowledge could be carried across some 40{}
miles of intervening territoIT than across 600 or 800 miles.
In short, Dr. Gilmore’s idea that this corridor was an easy
and logical route for the diffusion of agriculture was well
taken. The archaeologist, however, can only show that it
was a route of communication. Since none of the foreign
peoples who may have used this corridor stayed in it long
enough to influence the resident cultures, it may be inferred
that movements through it by traders, travelers, or migrating groups were rapid. An individual or small party could
have crossed from the Rio Grande to the Red River in a
few weeks if compelled to. I believe we consistently underrate the ability of Indians to cover very great distances, often
for seemingly trivial reasons.
If rapid crossings were made in this manner from time to
time, it is of considerable significance in chronological correlations, for it means that no time must be allowed for the
slow diffusion of Middle American elements across most of
Texas. Let me hasten to add, however, that any picture of
migrants or traders regularly using this route as a sort of
highway is bound to be erroneous. If small groups passed
along it more often than once in a century or so, we should
expect to find much more material evidence of it.
What evidence is there that the "Gilmore Corridor" was
ever used for such long journeys? First, it is well known
that early exploring expeditions quite commonly followed
Indian trails, being led along them by guides so as to visit
important settlements; or, if not literally following such

172

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

paths, they frequently had to cross and skirt tl~e same topographic features. Trappers, traders, and colonists would
later use the trails traced by explorers, wagon roads would
develop, and eventually railroads and modern highways
would more or less correspond to ancient routes over a given
terrain.
Thus, a route passing through the "Gilmore Corridor"
from northeastern Mexico to the agricultural Caddoar~ villages in eastern Texas, eventually came to be known in
Spanish days as the San Antonio Road and is now closely
followed by a modern highway. This highway is shown in
Plate 18 as beginning in iYIonterrey, Mexico, crossing the
Rio Grande at Laredo and passing north by northeast to San
Antonio; from here it turns to the northeast and crosses
the Colorado River at Bastrop, the Brazos near Bryan, the
Trinity between Madisonville and Crockett, and the Neches
southwest of Alto; from here it turns eastward to Nacogdoches, the official end of the San Antonio Road in the 18th
century. It can, however, be considered as extending farther
east to Natchitoches on the Red River in central Louisiana,
for in the early 18th century much trade and diplomatic
business was carried on between those two posts, Spanish
and French respectively. The road might further be extended to the Natchez towns on the Mississippi or to the
mouth of Red River, the Red being an all-important artery
of communication. The original road passed a few miles
north of modern Bryan and Madisonville, but otherwise
the modern highway conforms almost exactly to it.
Plate 18 shows that the San Antonio Road closely parallels
the great curve of the Gulf coast, consistently 130 to 150
miles inland. From Monterrey to Nacogdoches is about 600
miles by highway; from there to Natchitoches is 100 miles;
and from there to the Mississippi about 125 miles.
If one supposes that a trail conforming to the general
course of the San Antonio Road was already known to preColumbian Indians, it is quite possible that several early
explorers made use of it, at least in part. As early as 1542
the De Soto expedition under Luis de Moscoso (who came

Importance o~ the "’Gilmore Corridor"

173

to command after De Soto’s death) attempted to reach
Mexico City overland. From some point in southern Arkansas, Moscoso led the party southwestward through
country inhabited by Caddoan-speaking peoples, reaching
villages of the Hasinai division of this family, probably in
the Angelina and Neches River valleys; from here they
passed on to a large river identified by Swanton as the Trinity, but at this point they abandoned the overland trip,
returning "by the same route" to the Mississippi to attempt
to reach Mexico by boat.2, What is particularly interesting
is that the Spaniards seem to have had a very good idea of
how to reach Mexico overland, and~ since they passed
through the Hasinai country, later traversed by the San
Antonio Road, it is quite possible that they were actually
on it as far as the Trinity. That Moscoso decided to abandon
this attempt was probably due in part to accounts of wild
and hostile tribes west of that river.2~
After being shipwrecked on Matagorda Bay, La Salle made
two attempts in 1686 and 1687 to reach the Illinois country.
While exploring the possible routes by which to lead his
men to Illinois, La Salle seems to have gone rather directly
northward and northeastward to the "Cenis" (French equivalent of Hasinai) villages before he was murdered. He may
therefore have been guided northward to intercept a trail
conforming to the San Antonio Road, thence northeastward
to the Hasinai villages. Scholars might well consider such
n-latters in tracing the journeys of early explorers, usually
extremely vague.
In 1690 Fray Canafias de Jesus Maria founded the mission
Santlssimo Nombre de Maria close to the Neches river, in
proximity to several large villages of the Neche and other
Hasinai tribes. In 1691 Father Massanet founded mission
San Francisco de los Tejas within a few miles of the first one.
In 1-714 the French established a fort at Natchitoches in Louisiana, and in 1715 St. Denis made a rapid trip to Mexico City,
21 John 1~ Swanton, Source ]~faterial on the History and Ethnolo~ of the Caddo
Indians, Bureau of American t~thnolo~-, Bulletin 132, pp. 31-32, 1942.
22 Idem, po 32. Swanton says tl~t the tribes beyond the Trinity "were evidently
Tonkawa or Bidai." but we should have to know whether these tribes were living in
central Texw at this time before accepting such an identification.

174

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

passing through the Hasinai villages and crossing the San
Marcos River in central Texas, undoubtedly following the
course of the San Antonio Road. In 1716 several Spanish
missions were established in eastern Texas, including that
at Nacogdoches. In this year St. Denis made another trip to
Mexico, and from then on, especially with the founding of
missions in the San Antonio area, there must have been
almost constant travel between northern Mexico and the
I-Iasinai country. The San Antonio Road had become quite
literally a highway across Texas and has remained so to the
present day. The travelers started from different points in
northern Mexico, and had various objectives in eastern
Texas, but that they generally "funneled" their route
through the "Gilmore Corridor" seems undeniable. The
Tejas or I-Iasinai tribes of the eastern Texas forests, with
their intensive agriculture, large towns, temples, fairs, etc.,
were always held in great contrast to the impoverished and
thinly scattered peoples west of them.
Except for the mountain ranges of Trans-Pecos Texas and
the fairly rugged canyons of the Edwards Plateau, there are
few topographic ~eatures in Texas to hinder travel on foot
or horse. We can be sure that natives and Europeans alike
could and did travel over the state in many directions. We
should not, therefore, overestimate the importance of the
"Gilmore Corridor" or expect that expeditions made great
detours in order to reach it. Its usefulness was most apparent to those traveling back and forth between northeastern
Mexico and the eastern forests, and it was evidently considered very preferable to the coastal plain. To judge from
published journals, there was much less hostility from the
natives in this belt than along the coast. Also, it should be
remembered that this corridor skirts the Edwards Plateau,
the main canyons of which run from northwest to southeast,
across the line of travel to easterr~ Texas. Once past the
Plateau, one could take any of many courses to the east,
northeast, and north, continuing into Oklahoma without
hindrance from any natural barriers.
Archaeological evidence does not yet permit a definite
statement on how long ago this corridor was used for long-

Importance of the "’Gilmore Corridor’;

range travel.

175

MacNeish has recently outlined the occur-

rence of certain artifact types which suggest a "chain of
contacts" across central Texas, reaching from the Huastecan
cultures in Tamaulipas to the Caddoan region ,of easterr~
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma. This study was
made primarily to account for the presence-of ceremonial
elements at the Spiro mounds in eastern Oklahoma.z3 MacNeish’s article throws into relief the probability that the
"central Texas route" was preferred to others in this direction, but I do not believe that the projectile-point styles on
which he bases his argument are very convi.ncing for the
particular problem of contact between ~he Huastecan area
and Caddoan cultures. That is, one can hardly assume that
the people who left certain styles of projectile points along
this route were also the bearers of highly developed Middle
American ceremonial traits. Nevertheless, his data points to
the use of this corridor by pre-Columbian Indians.
There are a few published references to clay and stone
figurine heads of Mexican origin in localities in or near the
"Gilmore Corridor." Other such objects are on record in
the University of Texas files and.dre being carefully checked
as to the conditions of discovery. When not found in connection with Indian habitation sites they are of small value
and in more than one case the figurine was traceable to
modern visitors to Mexico. Even the most trustworthy
speciments are quite hard to identify as to date and place of
origin.2, When all such cases are thoroughly examined, it
should be possible to gain a good idea of their source and
the time or times during which they were carried into Texas.
23 See note 7.
24 A carved herd of "hard volcanic ash" ~rom a gravel I)it in Dallas, Texas, was
reported in this Bulletin, Vol. 4, ~)I). 79-80, 1932, by Ellis W. Shuler.
A head of
green, stone from a stratified archaeological site in Travis County near At~stin ",vas
reported by Carl Chelf in this Bulletin, Vol. 13, ~0p. 58-62, 1941.
In Vol. 17. 1946,

Mr. and Mrs. J. H. !Ray described a clay head similar to those of the Mexican god
Xipe Totec; this was found near Cisco in north-central Texas. A very similar "Xipe
Totec" head was found in 1947 near :Fort Worth by Miss Sylvla Golden and reported
to R. L. Stephenson of the Smithsonian Institution, :River Basins Survey.
A small,
flat clay head, possibly mold-made, comes from near the swimming pool at Barton
Springs in Austin, the site of a large aboriginal careD. The carved stone head with
~onlcal cap, mentioned by Mac~Nelsh (op. cir.) as certainly Huastecan, was found long
ago in Callahan County, but whether in a habitation site or not is unknown.
When

found in the open country of northern Texas, the Mexican figures may well have been
carried along some western route.

176

Texas Arch~oIogicaI and Paleontological Society

In contrast to the present indefinite information provided
by figurines in scattered parts of Texas, the Davis mound
site near Alto in Cherokee County, central east Texas, gives
evidence of a comparatively strong influence from Middle
American cultures.

This material will soon be published

(see note 3). Briefly, a ceramic complex including quantities
of highly polished black and brown pottery with finely engraved designs was found in and under a large platform
mound of clay. The closest apparent affiliations of this pottery lie with early Formative cultures in southern Mexico
and the Maya region; on the other hand, certain non-ceramic
traits at Davis suggest at least partial contemporaneity with
such relatively early eastern cultures as Adena, Tchefuncte,
Copena, and Hopewell. The writer estimates that these influences merged at the Davis site by about 500 A.D. i~ not
earlier.
It is therefore remarkable to note that the Davis site is
directly on the "Old San Antonio Road" just east of the
Neches River crossing between present Alto and Crockett.
There is some argument as to just where the first Spanish
missions were located in this vicinity, but by the time the
"Road" had become firmly established in the 18th century, ~t
passed over the same narrow terrace on which the mound is
located. This may of course be pure coincidence, but the
possibility cannot be ignored that the trail from Mexico that
later became the San Antonio Road was already in use many
centuries before the Spanish explorations. Furthermore, a
migrating group passing northeastward toward the Mississippi Valley region would have found in the Neches valley
one of the first really attractive environments for agricultural pursuits along this route. In protohistoric times the
Neches valley also marked the western extent of firmly
established agricultural communities of the Hasinai.
So far as archaeological records reveal at present, the
Davis site may represent an initial introduction of agricultural knowledge into the entire region of the Eastern United
States woodlands. It ~would be foolish to insist on such a
claim, however, for there is too much involved and not

Importance of the "GiI~nore Corridor"

177

enough direct evidence yet by which to trace the spread of
agriculture in space and time.
As to. the establishment of agricultural life in the Neches
valley more than 800 miles from the Soto la Marina river,
the intervening country being entirely non-agricultural so
far as known, there should be no theoretical objections.
Archaeologists are prone to insist that nothing can be proved
without continuous distributions. In this respect they are
rather in a rut and out of step with living history. When an
unhappy or disgruntled or hungry segment of a population
decides to seek a new homeland, it has often wandered great
distances before settling down in a new environment. Due
to its economic basis of existence, the group will in all probability seek a natural environment in which it can pursue
a similar economy, in this case an intensively agricultural
one supplemented with some hunting, fishing, and collecting
of wild plant foods.
Thus, to anyone familiar with the geography of Texas, it is
not at all surprising that a Middle American agricultural
group would cross most of the state before reaching a humid
forested region where it could continue the habitual economy
under climatic conditions similar to the homeland. The Rio
Soto la Marina is only the closest point in Mexico from which
such a movement is conceivable. We know next to nothing
of this northern outpost, however, and if it were settled in
comparatively late times, a much more southern part of
Mexico could well have been the original point of departure.
The distance covered may thus have been 1000 miles or even
considerably more. My point is that the movement of a
given cultural group, its causes, and place of settlement are
of first importance, the actual distance traveled quite incidental. A trek of 100 miles is no more !ogical or easier to
prove than one of 1000 miles.
Conclusions
There is no present evidence for pre-Columbian agriculture on either side of the lower Rio Grande in the zone of
precipitation effectivity designated DB’d by Thornthwaite.
Neither is such evidence at hand for agriculture in the

178

Te:cas A~’cheoIogicaI and Paleontological Society

southern half of Texas in the CB’d (dry sub-humid) and
CB’r (moist sub-humid) zones. Since native crops could
probably have been raised without irrigation in most years
in the two sub-humid zones, three possible explanations have
come to mind: (A) due to past climatic changes, the area in
which these zones are now found was less favorable when
agriculture was being spread into northern Mexico; (B) the
climate was favorable but the pre-Columbian Indians in this
belt were adverse to adopting it;: or (C) agriculture was
adopted as a supplement to the economy but we have not
found the evidence. It is highly improbable that agriculture
was practiced in the drier semi-arid zone at any time. Further
work on the correlation of culture and climate may show
more definitely the width of these zones when the knowledge
of agriculture reached into northeastern Mexico.
In pre-Columbian times as well as in the European period,
long-distance travel between northeastern Mexico and the
eastern woodlands Was often funneled through the "Gilmore
Corridor" in preference to other routes, although due to the
general absence of serious physical barriers in most of Texas,
such travel undoubtedly was carried over other routes as
well. The "Gilmore Corridor" simply presents certain natural advantages for traverse in a ~northeast-southwest direction across the southern parts of Texas, and was evidently
much prefered to the coastal fringe.
As a route of communication over a very long period, it is
quite possible that. the "Gilmore Corridor" was also the
route by which agricultural knowledge was carried to the
Eastern United States, crossing rapidly the broad expanses
of northeastern Mexico and Texas which were either unsuitable for it or inhabited by tribes adverse to adopting it. This
much granted, it is further conceivable that other culture
traits were similarly carried rapidly across these expanses
in either or both directions, leaving no traces of their establishment among the intervening peoples.

N~ws No~es and Editorials

179

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS

THE POCKET GOPHER AT THE JOHNSON SITE:
A CORRECTION
In an article entitled "The Johnson Site: Type Site of the
Axansas Focus of the Texas Coast," published in Volume 18 of this
Bulletin, I reported (p. 46) the occurrence of bones of the pocket
gopher, genus Thomomys, at the Johnson site.

Dr. W. Armstrong

Price of Corpus Christi recently called my attention to the fact that
Thomomys does not now live on the Texas coast, and he suggested
that the pocket gopher remains from the Johnson site may have
been incorrectly identified (letter, May 10, 1948).
A_t the suggestion of Dr. Price, these pocket gopher remains
were sent to Dr. William B. Davis, Head of the Deparmtent of
Wildlife Management, Agricultural and Mechanical College of
Texas. Dr. Davis, author of "Distribution and Variation of Pocket
Gophers (Genus Geomys) in the Southwestern United States"
(Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin No. 690, 1940),
has extensively collected pocket gophers from the Coastal Plains
of Texas and has also described many new subspecies from that
area. In a letter dated May 15, 1948, Dr. Davis reported as follows:
"The specimens of pocket gopher you submitted for identification
prove to be Geomys cf. persona~us .... The size of the mandible
and the teeth compare favorably with Geomys personatus, a form
now li.ving from Corpus Christi southward:"
It is regrettable that this error has entered the published record,
for some mammalogists may be misled into believing that
Thomomys, a western pocket gopher, once had a more southeastern
distribution in the United States than at present. The occurrence of
Geomys at the Johnson site agrees with the present known distribution of that genus. According to distribution maps pu~lioned
by Dr. Davis (reference cited above, Figs. 2, 3..ha s), Geomys cf.
personatus of the Johnson oi~¢ ~,ccurs Just north and east of fahe
present rsng¢ o£ Oeornys personatus and on the southern margin
of ~_he present range of Geomys brevice~s. The scanty data provided by the Johnson site fauna suggests that within the past
thousand years Geomys personatus lived somewhat farther north
than at present.
T. N. ¯ Campbell
The University of Texas

180

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society
PANHANDLE-PLAINS MUSEUM, CANYON

In response to our inquiry, Mr. Floyd V. Studer replied:
"It would be a pleasure to respond to your request with reference to a report of our field activities of the Panhandle.
Plains Historical Society Museum, except for the fact that we
have done so little in this direction since the war that we actually have nothing to report."
However, this does not mean that things have not been happening at Canyon. A new addition to the Museum building has been
made, and although there is no plaster on the walls as yet, the
floor space is there and usable. Boone McClure and his assistants
have set up a number of new exhibits. A visit to the Museum
gives one the feeling that it is growing with a lusty abandon. All
of Texas is proud of what the Panhandle institution is doing to
preserve the cultural history of the area.

EL PASO ARCH/KEOLOGICAL SOC~
The E2 Paso Archaeological Society has forty-three (43) members
at present, and have regular monthly meetings, with the exception
of June, July and August. The election of officers was held in
January, 1948. Mrs. Glen E. Moore was elected President, Mr. Ray
O’Bryan, Vice President, and Mr. Lloyd Ault, Secretary-Treasurer.
At the February meeting, Mr. Wiltz Harrison, silversmith, gave
an interesting talk on "Indian Silver, Old and New." At the March
meeting, Robert Zingg spoke on the Tarahumara Indians. In April
Mr. Chas. Hutchinson talked on the Klondike Gold Rush, using
pictures that were taken at the time but since colored and made
into slides. In May the entire group were the guests of the Grant
County Archaeological Society, arriving at Silver City on a Saturday. Joint meetings of the Societies were held that night with Dr.
C. L. Sonnichsen, E1 Paso historian, giving a talk on the Apaches.
D,-. ~rold E. Cooley, president of the Grant County Society also
gave a tal~. o~-, ~,luday morning the combined groups first visited
Treasure Hill, excavated by tl~e Cwg~oves, next they stopped at
the Santa Rita mine, then went to the Galaz ~uin, and on to
Mimbres Hot Springs for picnic lunch. After lunch the g~-up
followed the Mimbres to the old Butterfield stage depot, City of
Rocks, and to Faywood Hot Springs. It was a wonderful trip.
For the October meeting, the El Paso group made a field trip to
cave shelters in the Hueco Mountains~
The Society has a very nice collection of Chihuahua pottery,

News Notes and Editorials

181

from the collection of Mrs. D. Bruce Smith, placed at the Municipal
Airport. This is we hope, a permanent display, to be changed
twice a year.
Our principal objective at the present is to preserve our camp
sites and educate our members to make records of all trips, finds
and excavations.
Mrs. Glenn E. Moore

UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA MUSEUM, NORMAN

The Museum of the University of Oklahoma is a departure
from the usual practice among universities in that a lot of small
and inaffective departmental "museums" have been combined into
one organization with a common exhibition building, research and
storage laboratories.
At present, the Museum is moving into its new quarters.
stallation will probably be completed by April of 1949.

In-

The exhibition building is fireproof. The windows have been
closed and an attic fan provided for cooling and changing the air
to increase the comfort. The large and small animal groups of
the Divisions of Zoology, Botany, and Geology and Paleontology
exhibits occupy the first floor. The Divisions of American Indian,
Classical Art and Archaeology, Anthropology, and History occupy
the second floor.
All of the exhibition cases are cloth lined, and the trimming is
light in color.
The laboratory and storage space will make all collections more
Consequently, research is expected to take on new

available.
vitality.

Special features of interest to all Divisions of the Museum are:
(1) a Dendrochronology laboratory, (2) a Caddoan typological
pository, (3) a Lapidary room, (4) a Photographic studio, (5)
General Work Shop, and (6) a Conference and Lecture Room_

a

Robert E. Bell

WITTE MUSEUM, SA!q ANTONIO

About two thousand years ago the Cave Dweller Indian and
Basket Maker Indian settled in what is now known as the Big
Bend of Texas. It is believed that ~t nn~ *~ ~l~e people occupied a strip ~rom ~l~= c~u~x u~ Mexico to Utah. From where they
came and where they went is still unknown. A large mural

~182

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

8’ x 15’ by Anthony De Young depicting these people is high
on the wall opposite as we enter the museum and the Cave D~ve!ler
room is on the right.
That these people loved peace there can be little doubt, but,
that they found it necessary to constantly defend themselves and
their families is plainly shown by their choice of weapons and
the location of their homes.
Their home was a shelter or cave high in the canyon walls. One
needs the sure foot and dexterity of a mountain goat to reach
them. How they prevented all of their youngsters from taking
the shortest route to the canyon floor before they developed this
agility we will never know, unless they had the instinct of fledglings. The prospect of carrying the daily water supply up these
canyon walls is appalling.
During their time the bow was not yet known, so they used
what is known as the Atlatl, or spear thrower and the rabbit
stick, which was also used to fend off the shafts of their enemies.
The so-called rabbit stick is always found in conjunction with the
Atlatl.
These people spent their days hunting and fishing and although
it was a necessity to keep themselves supplied with food, they
were not without sporting blood. They devised weapons, traps,
snares and nets to help and to satisfy their necessities. They devised fishhooks without barbs. The lures were tied somewhat in
the manner of a present day fly and were attached to a very light
fiber line.
We imagine the twilight hours spent around the fire were devoted to the telling and retelling of the day’s adventures. Those
of special note were painted on the shelter walls in black and
red. The job was so well done that the animals and fish depicted
can be identified today, and are more realistic than we see in
many so-called "modern art" pictures.
There was no store around the corner or in the next block that
the family could go to if they needed a new knife, basket or dress.
They manufactured what they needed using every piece of bone,
stone, wood, shell or grass that came into their hands. If the need
was urgent the manufacturing process was carried only so far
as to~ make the article usefu!, but at other times the process was
completed and a good polishing and sometimes carving job was
thrown in.
x~ ~=s v~]~ ~ al~uce around this room to see that nearly every
article and tool in every day us= ~. had ~ eoun~r1~ar~ m~nulfactured by these primitive people.

News No$es and Editorials

183

They smoked, and their pipes consisted of a joint of cane filled
with cedar foliage. The cane pipe was consumed at the same rate
as the cedar tobacco. When they finished their smoke they threw
the whole thing away and when they again wanted a smoke a new
pipe was cut.
As we enter the room we see the cast of a Cave Dweller’s head
and eleven oil paintings by Peter L. Hohnstedt depict the country
these people Hved in: Santa Helena Canyon; Rio Grande; Brewerstar County, Mule Canyon near Langtry looking south; Mule
Canyon near Eagle Cave; Haze in Chisos Mountains; Entrance of
Santa Helena Canyon; Evening, Del Carmen Mountains; Mule Ear
¯ Peaks, Brewster County; Castelon Peak, Brewster County. These
paintings are about a yard square and the large painting 5 x 7 on
the west wall shows the Chisos Mountains; and below it a plaster
model 6 x 12 feet of Petroglyphs found near Terlingua. There are
14 wall cabinets below the paintings, a map showing 20 named
sites; fiber sources; cordage; netting; basketry; matting; sandals; clothing; ornaments; tools; weapons; food; protectile
points; about 50 metates and manos are on the floor below the cases.
There are four floor cases showing protectile points, drills, bird
points, hatchets, arrow shafts; coiled pitched baskets, twin woven
storage baskets, lance blades, split pebble knives, fist axes, manos
and metates, hammer stones, celts, grooved manos, painted stones,
boat stones, fetishes, pendants and bone heads, sinkers, obsidian
cores, small points, drills and arrows.
There are two glass cases 5 x 5 and 31~ feet deep showing an
adult burial with accompanying artifacts and the other three infant
burials with their shell and paint stone toys and cradles.
The museum publishes the following illustrated bulletins of the
Southwest Texas Archaeological Society by George C. Martin:
Bulletin I, Big Bend Basket Makers, pp. 14.
Bulletin II; Big Bend Basket Makers, pp. 18.
Bulletin III, Big Bend Basket Makers, pp. 95.
Painted Pebbles from the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of
Texas by J. Walker Davenport and Carl Chelfo

M. L. Crimmins

HOUSTON ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, HOUSTON
Our group here is still excavating in the Doering Site, started
by Joe Wheat, but we have to finish before Christmas or abandon
the site as the new owner of the land does not want any excavating

184

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

done on his property. He gave us this short time to finish what
we could. We also have started a survey of Buffalo Bayou beginning about four miles above Addicks Dam, where the Bayou
is just a trickle of water, and working down towards Houston
some twenty miles away. We expect to finish this survey by
summer. Several interesting sites have already been noted.
We now have several new members in the group who are really
interested and who are helping to keep the organization going.
We try to hold one field trip each month for the entire membership, at which time we work on the Doering Site, and we also
have been putting one day~ a month into our survey. Meetings
are held once a month at the museum and from ten to twenty
people generally attend; of these about eight are actually interested in doing any field work. We more or less disbanded last
winter due to bad weather curtailing our excavating and the
fact that only a couple of others besides myself would share in
the responsibility of doing anything towards working up a program. The attendance also fell off considerably due to the museum
being poorly heated, however, we have done much better this
summer. We use the Texas A. & P. BuIlet~n a great deal on our
programs.
Concerning the museum itself, which has long been a disgrace
to Houston due to its poor building and meager budget, the Gold
Star Mothers are now talking with the City Fathers for a million
dollar building to be erected in memory o£ our war dead, and
should this become a reality the new museum would probably
have its own archaeologist, or a. curator of anthropology, and this
branch of science would come into its own at last in this area. We
are all keeping our fingers crossed hoping this may come about.
I will keep you posted of any new developments.
R. B. Worthington

DALLAS ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, DALLAS, TEXAS
That the Dallas Society has been unusually active is evidenced
by its mimeographed issues of The Record, Numbers 1, 2, and 3,
Vol. 7 for September, October, and November 1948.
Mr. Robert
Hatzenbushler is the editor and Mr. 1R. K. Harris is the assistant
editor.
Communications concerning the publication may be addressed to assistant editor, R. K. Harris, 9024 San Fernando Way,
Dallas, 18, Texas. The Dallas organization has been especially cooperative with Mr. R. L. Stephenson who has been making an
archaeological survey of the proposed reservoir sites in the Dallas

W. C. H.

News Notes and Editorials

185

WEST TEXAS HISTORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY,
ALPINE
Mr. Victor J. Smith writes:
"We will have some news notes for the Bulletin, but should
l~ke to develop latest information concerning a large gift
collection."
We will look forward to this announcement in time for the next
issue of the Bulletin.

THE 1948 ANNUAL MEETING AT AUSTIN

The twenty-first Annual Meeting of The Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society was held in Austin, Texas, October
23, 1948. The Society is especially indebted to the Program Committee, consisting of Dr. Tom N. Campbell, Dr. Alex D. Krieger,
and Dr. J. Charles Kelley, for the splendid arrangements and
cellent program. Members of the Department of Anthropology"
at The University of Texas held open house for visiting members
in the Anthropology Museum, Friday evening, October 22.
The following papers were read at the meeting:
Alex D. Krieger, Aims and Problems in Texas Archaeology.
Charles E. Meat, The Discovery of Folsom Points in Kincaid
Shelter, Uvalde County, Texas.
E. H. Sellards, Progress Report on the Excavation of Kincaid
Shelter, Uvalde County, Texas.
Robert E. Bell, Recent Archaeological Research in Oklahoma.
Jane Holden, Fingerprint Cave.
Cyrus N. Ray, Summary of Twenty Coke County Sites.
Clarence H. Webb, Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier and Haley
Foci as Transitior~al Cultures.
Robert L. Stephenson, Archaeological Survey of the Lavon Reservoir, Texas.
J. Charles Kelley, An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Rio
Grande Valley betweer~ Redford and Fabens, Texas.
Herbert C. Taylor, Jr., An Archaeological Reconnaissance in
Northern Coahuila, Me:vAco.
Erik K. Reed, Functions of the Staff Archaeologists in the National Park Service.

186

Texas Archeological and PaleontoZogicaI Society

TITLE OF PRESIDENT EMERITUS CONFERRED UPON
DR. CYRUS N. RAY
At the business sessio.n of the Austin meeting Colonel 1VL L.
Crimmins of San Antonio was elected President. Colonel Crimmins
is the second President of the Society, Dr. Cyrus N. Ray having
been elected President annually since its organization. It was
upon his own insistence that Dr. Ray was not re-elected. By a
unanimous vote of the members present, the following resolution
was adopted:
In recognition for twenty years of service as President of
The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, and
as Editor of its first seventeen volumes of the Bulletin and in
appreciation of the great amount of time that he has put in,
and for the contributions that he himself has made in archaeology, the Society confers upon Dr. Cyrus N. Ray the permanent honorary title of President Emeritus.

FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE SOCIETY

The Secretary-Treasurer desires to call attention to the critical
financial condition of the Society. Our balance at the end of October, 1948, was $511.42 as compared to a balance of $878.07 at the
end of October, 1947. This reduction in finances is the result of
the tremendous increase in the cost of printing the Bulletin while
at the same time, membership and membership dues have remained practically constant. It appears that ~he Society must
adopt one or more of the following alternatives within the near
future:
1. Increase membership dues.

2. Increase its membership. At least one hundred new members will be needed, at the present rate for annual dues, to
obtain needed revenue.
3. Reduce the size of the Bulletin considerably (possibly to approximately 64 pages).
4. Obtain voluntary contributions. This appears to be the most
desirable method provided it can be done. Here is an opportunity for some person or organization of charitable inclination to make a worthwhile contribution. The Society operates
with practically no overhead. Probably more than ninetyfive per cent of every dollar received is spent directly to pay
for cost of publications and mailing charges.
5. As a temporary expedient, the Society still has available most

News Notes and Editorials

187

volumes of the Bulletin at the regular price of $3°00 each. If
your file is incomplete, why not give us your order while the
Bulletins are available and while we are in desperate need
of more money.
It is hoped that the Society will take action on this matter at
the Alpine meeting.

THE 1949 MEETING

The next annual meeting of the Society will be held in the
spring of 1949 at Alpine in conjunction with the Southwestern
Division of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science. Heretofore, it has been our custom to meet in October,
but the benefits to be derived from meeting jointly with the
Southwestern Division seem to justify holding our next annual
meeting several months early.
The over-all program for the
Social Sciences is being handled by Dr. Erik Reed, National Park
Service, Santa Fe. It is the plan for the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society to hold a one day’s session under the direction of Col. M. L. Crimrnins, president of the Society. The
program for the sessions of the Society is being arranged by a
committee composed of Dr. T. N. Campbell, Dr. J. Charles Kelley,
and Mr. Alex Krieger. Anyone having suggestions for the program may communicate with the members of the committee. The
committee is also working with Dr. Erik Reed in order to correlate
the papers which will be presented at the sessions of the Society
with the general anthropological theme selected by the Southwestern Division.

THE 1949

BULLETIN

It is our intention at this time to get out the 1949 Bulletin im~
mediately after the Alpine meeting in the spring. We already
know of some five or six papers which will be available at that
time. We are sure that there will be a number of others. Anyone
who has something which he would hke to include in the 1949
Bulletin should have the manuscript in our hands not later than
May 15.
W. C. H.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

188

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY- TREASURER
OF THE TEXAS ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Report for the twentieth year from the annual meeting,
October 25, 1947, to October 23, 1948

RECEIPTS
Balance on October 25, 1947 ................................................. $ 845.07
Collected on 1946 dues .............................................................

15.00

Collected on 1947 dues ..................................................

192.00

Collected on 1948 dues ....................................................

33.00

Collected on 1949 dues ..........................................................

3.00

Collected on sale of Bulletins .........................................................

30.00

Total ............................................................................. $1127.07
DISBURSEMENTS
Postage

............................................................................ $

15.00

To Texas Tech Bookstore for ledger and rubber stamp ..........

2.60

To Texas Tech Press for letterhead stationery .......................

37.75

To Hester’s Office Supply for 1M, 7 x 10 envelopes ...............

22.30

To U. S. Copyright Office for copyright of Vol. 18 .................

2.00

To Texas Tech Press for printing Vol. 18 ..........................

590.00

Total ................................................................... $ 669.65
Balance on deposit in First National Bank, Lubbock,
Texas on October 23, 1948 ............................................. $ 457.42
ERNEST WALLACE,
Secretary-Treasurer

Membership List 1947-48

189

MI~MBERSHIP LIST 1947-48
HONORARY MEMBERS
Albert G. Ingalls, Scientific American Magazine,
....................................................................... _New York City, N. Y.
J. S. Bridwelh ........................................................ Wichita Falls, Texas
MEMBERS
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co ............................... Abilene, Texas
E. T. Adams ............................................................ Glen Rose, Texas
American Museum of Natural History ............. New York Ci~:y, N. Y.
American Philosophical Society. .......................... Philadelphia 6, Pa.
Max W. Ball, New Interior Bldg .....................Washington 25, D. C.
D. A. Bandeen, West Texas Chamber of Commerce....Abilene, Texas
Baylor University Library ........................................ __-Waco, Texas
G. C. Benson, Box 381 ...............................................Whitney, Texas
Joe Benton ........................................................................ Nocona, Texas
W. P. Brennan_ ................. Crystal City, Texas
Mrs. Charles Brower (Hall Ranch) ................. _Richland Springs, Texas
Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institute,
.................................................................................Washington, D. C.
C. M. Caldwell ........................................................... _Abilene, Texas
Tom N. Campbell, University of Texas ......................... Austin, Texas
Mrs, Wm. H. Campbell, Box 116 Kings Canyon Road,
..................................................................................... Carson City, Nev.
Sam Chamberlain ................................................................ Refugio, Texas
Cleveland Public Library ......................................... Cleveland, Ohio
Columbia University Library .............................. New York City, N. Y.
Col. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road ............... San Antonio, Texas
Dallas Public Library ......................................................... Dallas, Texas
E. C. de Montel, 1000 City National Bldg ............Wichita Falls, Texas
Frederic H. Douglas, Denver Art Museum, 1300 Logan St.,
.......................................................................................... Denver 3, Colo.
Dr. C. D, Eaves, Texas Technological College ........... Lubbock, Texas
Helen S. Farrington, E! Paso Public Library. ................. E1 Paso, Texas
Field Museum of Natural History ....................................... Chicago, Ill.
W. S. Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick Drilling Co ......... Corpus Christi, Texas
R. E. Forrester, Box 243, T. C. U. Station ............... Fort Worth, Texas
W. S. Fulton ................................................................ Dragoon, Arizona
Gila Pueblo ...................................................................... Globe, Arizona
Frank Grimes ..................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Hardin-Simmons University Library ........................... Abilene, Texas
R. K. Harris, 9024 San Fernando Way ........................... Dallas, Texas
Frank H. Hayne, Texas Technological College ........... Lubbock, Texas
Dr. T. W. Hedrick .......................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. Frank C. Hibbon, 3000 Campus Blvd ............. Albuquerque, N. M.

190

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

Dr. T. L. Hodges ................................................................... Bismark, Ark.
Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological College .......... Lubbock, Texas
Houston Public Library.................................................... Houston, Texas
Instituto Panamericano de Geogra~ia e Historia, 192 Avenida
del Observatorio ............... Tacubaya, D. F., Republica Mexicana
Illinois State Museum ........................................................ Springfield, Ill.
A. T. Jackson, 508 E. 46th Street...................................... Austin, Texas
Henry James ........................................................................ Abilene, Texas
Joint University Libraries .........................................Nashville 4, Tenn.
’Johns Hopkins University Library ......................... Baltimore 18, Md.
Percy Jones ......................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Roland Jones ......................................................................... Dallas, Texas
L. G. Kammerdiener, Texas Technological College.~..Lubbock, Texas
Harold M. Kautz, 3253 Sondra Drive ...................... Fort Worth, Texas
J. Charles Kelley, University of Texas .......................... Austin, Texas
Dr. Oscar Kinchen, Texas Technological College ....... Lubbock, Texas
1V~rs. Forrest Kirkland, 911 S. Van Buren Avenue ........ Dallas, Texas
Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas..: ........................... Austin, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology ...................................... Santa Fe, N. M.
Wann Langston, Jr., Texas Technological College .... Lubbock, Texas
La Retama Public Library .................................. Corpus Christi, Texas
Judge Harry J. Lemley ............................................................ Hope, Ark.
Eli Lilly, 5807 Sunset Lane ....................................... Indianapolis, Ind.
Kenneth MacGowan, 10727 LeConte Avenue ......... Los Angeles, Calif
Dr. J. G. McAllister, Dept. of Anthropology,
University of Texas ..................................................... Austin, Texas
A. T. McDannald, Box 2972 ............................................. Houston, Texas
E. A. McIlhermy_L ...................................................... Avery Island, La.
Dr. S. S. McKay, Texas Technological College .......... Lubbock, Texas
McMurry College ............................................................ Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Glen E. Moore, Rt. 1 Box 284 ................................... E1 Paso, Texas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation,
Huntington Free Library.................................. New York City, N. Y.
Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place ............................ Chicago, Ill.
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and
42nd Streets ....................................................... New York City, N. Y.
Northwestern University Library ...................................... Evanston, Ill.
Oklahoma Agriculture and Mechanical College ....... Stillwater, Okla.
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University.................................................. Cambridge, Mass.
W. M. Pearce, Texas Technological College ............... Lubbock, Texas~
H. A. Pender....................................................... ~bilene, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept. of American Archaeology...~ndover, Mass.
Judge Hermon C. Pipkin ............................................... Amarillo, Texas
L. E. Rawalt, 725 Post St ...................................... Corpus Christi, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 .............................................. Abilene, Texas
J. Henry Ray, 2130 Fannin St ............................................. Vernon, Texas

Membership List 1947-48

191

Dr: Erik K. Reed, National Park Service ...................... Santa Fe, N. M.
Rev. Henry Retzek ..............................................................Wheaton, Minn.
P. M. Rice ........................................................................ Hamilton, Texas
Rice Institute Library ..................................................... Houston, Texas
Dr. R. N. Richardson, Hardin-Simmons University ..... Abilene, Texas
Thomas E. Roberts ............................................................ Abilene, Texas
Rosenberg Library ...................................................... Galveston, Texas
San Antonio Public Library ............................. San Antonio, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park ............ San Diego, Calif.
E. B. Sayles, Arizona State Museum ........................Tucson,.Arizona
Henry Sayles, Jr .................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University.._._.Dallas, Texas
Judge O. L. Sims ............................................... Paint Rock, Texas
Prof. Victor J. Smith, Sul Ross College ..................... Alpine, Texas
Smithsonian Institution .........................................Washington, D. C.
Societe des Americanistes, Musee de L’ Homme,
Palais de Chaillot
.......... Paris, France
F. J. Soday, 4012 Southern Parkway ............................. Louisville, Ky.
Southern Methodist University Library ................... Dallas, Texas
Southwest Museum Library, Highland Park 42.._Los Angeles, Calif.
Stephen F. Austin State Teachers College Library,
.......................................................................... Nacogdoches, Texa~
R. L. Stephenson, Dept. of Anthropology,
University of Texas .................................................... Austin, Texas
Floyd V. Studer, 635 Amarillo Bldg .......................... _Amarillo, Texas
H. C. Taylor, Jr., University of Texas ........................ Austin, Texas
Waiter W. Taylor, Jr., 711 Carnino del Monte Sol ...... Santa Fe, N. M.
Tcxas Agricultural and Mechanical College Library,
.............................................................................. College Station, Texas
Texas College of Mines Library ...................................... E1 Paso, Texas
Texas Library and Historical Commission ............... ~..Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library
...... Lubbock,
Thomas Gilc~ease Foundation .........................................Tulsa,
W. Tilton ......................................................................Topeka,
Tyre!l Public Library ............................................ _Beaumont,
University Museum Library, Univ. of Penn.,

Texas
Okla.
Kans.
Texas

33rd and Spruce ............................................... Philadelphia 4, Pa.
University of Arizona Library............................... Tucson, Arizona
University of Arkansas Library .......................... Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library ........................... Berkeley, Calif.
University of California at Los Angeles .............. Los Angeles, Calif.
University of Chicago Library .................................. Chicago, Ill.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library ................ Denver, Colo.
University of Illinois Library............................................... Urbana, IlL
University of Kansas Library: ............................ Lawrence, Kans.
University of Michigan Library ...................... _Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Nebraska Library ................... :_ ............. Lincoln, Neb.

192

Texas Archaeological and PaleontolOgical Society

University of New Mexico Library ...................... Albuquerque, N. M.
University of Texas Library ........................... Austin, Texas
Mrs. W. C. Vernon, Texas Technological College ...... Lubbock, Texas
Wac0 Public Library ............................................................ Waco, Texas
Dr~ Ernest Wallace, Texas Technological College ..... Lubbock, Texas
P. H. Walser, 1102 N. 1st St. ........................................... Temple, Texas
Waco, Texas
Frank H. Watt, Box 1176 ...............
Dr. Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons University ........ Abilene, Texas
William C. Watts, 2111 23rd Street ............................ Lubbock, Texas
Harry E. Weaver, 432 Epperson Bldg .................................. Houston, Texas
Dr. C. H. Webb, Children’s Clinic ............................ Shreveport, La.
Joe Ben Wheat, University of Arizona .................... Tucson, Arizona
A. H. Witte .............................................................. Henrietta, Texas
Witte Museum ..................................................... _San Antonio, Texas
Lloyd O. Walcott, Box 327 ...................................... Hereford, Texas
R. B. Worthington, 4216 Walker Ave ......................... Houston, Texas
Yale University Library .............................................. New Haven, Conn.

BULLETIN
OF THE

VOLUME TWENTY
1949

Published

b~ the
Lubbock,

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL

PRINTED

IN THE UNITED

$OCI ETY

STATES

OF AMERICA

BULLETIN
of the

igexa Archeologiral auil
laleonlologira!
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Skeletal Remains of Man and Extinct Animals:
A Camp Site Covered by River Drift.
By E. T. Adams ........................................................................

7

2. Archaeological Survey of Levon and
Garza:Little Elm Reservoirs: A Preliminary Report.
By Robert L. Stephenson ...................................................... 21
3. Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande
Valley, Texas.
By T. N. Campbell and Jack O. Frizzell ............................... 63
4. A Tentative Cultural Sequence for the Area
About the Mouth of the Pecos.
By Hubert C. Taylor, Jr ...................................................... 73
5. Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House
Structures in Western Texas.
By Charles Kelly....................................................... 89
6. Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties.
By Jean Quirm and Jane Holden .................................. 115
7. News Notes and Editorials................................................ 132
8. Report of the Secretary-Treasurer................................. 135
9~ Membership List ........................................................ 136
Vol. 20, 1949.

Price $3.00

Lubbock, Texas

Whe exas Ar heo og a
OFFICERS
VIc,I~OR J. SMIT~, Alpine, President
CYRUS N. RAY,

Abilene, President Emeritus

Ar~Ex D. KRIV.G~a, Austin, Active Vice-President
E~sT WALr~ACV., Lubbock, Secretary-Treasurer
W. C. HOLDEN,

Lubbock, Editor ol Publications

DIRECTORS
In Addition to the Above
T. N. Campbell, Austin

Col. M. L. Crimmins, San Antonio

C. Boone McClure, Canyon

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
J. Charles Kelley, Austin

Floyd V. Studer, Amarillo

R. K. Harris, Dallas

F.H. Douglas, Denver, Colo.

Mrs. Glen E. Moore, E1 Paso Otto O. Watts, Abilene
Rupert N. Richardson, Abilene
Erik K. Reed, Santa Fe

TRUSTEES
E. W. Shuler, Dallas

Robert E. Bell, Norman, Okla.

Frank Grimes, Abilene

O. L. Simms, Paint Rock

W. C. Watts, Lubbock

Mrs. Forest Kirkland, Dallas

Glen L. Evans, Austin

E. H. Sellards, Austin

The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and seientitle undertaking; for the study of the
history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas;
for the encouragement of the proper
collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums and their
study and elassifieation and the publication of the results of the researches
incident thereto.
The BULLETIN is published annually
for distribution to members of the society. Opinions expressed herein are
those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent views of the society or
the editorial staff.

SKELETAL REMAINS OF MAN AND EXTINCT
ANIMALS:

A CAMP SITE COVERED BY RIVER DRIFT
E. T. ADAMS
It has been the opinion of many eminent anthropologistS
~f some years past that the Americas have not been occupied by members of the human race for-more than a few
thousand years. This opinion has been modified somewhat
in the last twenty years or more due to flqe research of
American archaeologists, so that until recently it had been
thought that man has lived in North America ten to fifteen
thousand years. Due to the recent excavations of the Ventana Cave near Tuscon, Arizona, the date of such occupation
is~ now placed at thirty-five thousand years or more. .~
The failure to regard the Americas, particularIy North
America, as a center of the development of the human race
is influenced by the fact that neither the fossil remains of
the ape nor those of a man of the Neanderthal type have
been found in North America. The presence of fossil man
in both North America and Europe is generally deemed to
be due to migrations from both the west and the east.
Having become interested in the Piltdown man during hi~
student days, the writer has devoted a greaf amount of tim~
since to field research in the area surrounding his own home~
to determine if any comparable evidence of ancient ma~
could be found. This is the locality of the four bends of the
Brazos River, which has cut its valley about nineteen mile~
wide and about six hundred feet deep through the limestone
of the Lower Cretaceous. It is a very ancient river: In the
many canyons and other water courses flowing across the
valley and cutting into the river drift, are exposed banl~
which exhibit the deposits of the ancient river, particularly,
those of the Miocene and of the Pleistocene. Along the
carpments of the Cretaceous stone are cliffs where the less
indurated stone has decayed, forming shelter caverns

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

which there are many. It is believed that the stratigraphy
of the more favorably situated caverns dates from the third
interglacial period upwards.
Some modern farming operations had uncovered some
bones, which were ignored by the operator. A large piece
of a human occiput was given the writer by an amateur
archaeologist, and from him the location was ascertained.
The occiput was unusually thick: 14 mm. at the internal
bccipital protuberance, and 10 mm. elsewhere.
A thorough search of the locality has been made, and continues to be made at infrequent intervals. Parts of the
skeletal remains of four individuals have been discovered: a
young woman about nineteen years of age, another woman
eight or ten years older, an infant, and an old man. There
was a fire hearth but neither pottery nor grinding stones.
About the hearth were bones of extinct animals. Pieces of
glyptodont armor were the most frequent. Teeth and parts
of the mandibles of pig, bison primigenius, wolf, ground
sloth~ and an ancient deer, together with unidentified teeth
were found.
.Thesmaller foramina of the human bones were filled with
the~blu~h loess which marks the second interglacial period.
The stratigraphy of the site was destroyed by the farming
operations. Only one bone was found intact, the right femur
of the young woman. (Measurements: 17½ inches long;
platymeria, taken at UF., LM 28, AP 20 mm. Pilaster taken
at middle, LM 24 mm., AP 26 mm.: muscular attachments
~light.)
!Sufficient of the fragments of the skull of the young
woman were found so that a profile view could be. reconStructed in part(Plate 1, Fig. 1). The skull was not unusually thick, and, upon:comparison with the skull bits of the
’older woman and the "old man, it seems that the thickness
Of’these skulls increased with age. Onlyone of the principal
measurements was estimated; that of the biporionic vertic~il
height, which ~vas placed at 79 mm. No attempt has been
’made to estimate the nasion-inion distance because it is

PLATE 1

Skeletal Remains of Man and Extinct Animals

11

evident that the nasion was well forward of the position
usually expected. The supra-orbital rims diverge laterally
and posteriorly from the supra-orbital notches (Plate 2,.
Fig. 2). The frontal sinuses are large and extremely extensive laterally. The basion and the whole of the right
maxilla and zygoma are missing. The greater part of the
left half of the young woman’s mandible and a portion of
the left maxilla were found, as well as the left zygoma.
The extinct snails and clam shown on Plate 2, Fig. 4c do
not form a basis for estimating the date of the occupation
by these people. They were there in any event. The animals
mentioned could have belonged to a much later period, except the B. Primigenius. It is assumed that the many different remains of the animals reached this place by the
hands of these people.
The bison deserves particular mention. He is far younger
than the human race in his development, and exhibits more
clearly the climatic conditions through which he passed to
achieve the specialized form of his teeth of the present day
(Plate 2, Fig. 3). The teeth and mandible shown in Fig. 3
(Plate 2) exhibit the pieces of jaws and teeth found scattered about the site. The crests are high and the width
(bucchallingual) narrow. These are compared with those of
the bison (Plate 2, Fig. 3) of the "pitch bog" days. The
latter are about twice as broad as the former and have the
crests well ground down. The present day bison has teeth
about.twice as wide as the "pitch bog" bison, without crests,
and well affixed to the jaw, forming an efficient mill .for
grinding his food (Plate 2, Fig. 3 b).
Recourse is next had to the:differences between the scanty
skeletal remains of these people and the same portions of
modern man’s skeleton. On the whole, so many of the skeletal exhibits are so like those of modern man that many of
them would pass unnoticed by a competent observer of such
matters.Mention has been made above of.the peculiar position a~d direction of the supra-orbital rim. This makes
an angle of about seventy degrees with a plane passed verti~
cally through the saggital suture and the center of the frontal

12

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

and suggests the Rhodesian Man and the extinct lemur of
North America for a likeness of structure, contrasting strikingly with the frontal plane of modern man. This is believed
to occur as some sort of compensation for the rigidity of the
spine of these people. The processes of each vertebra overlapping the one just below present a box-like trough effect
instead of the V-shaped effect of the modern spine, which
permits us, by pivoting the body about, to look entirely
around us without moving our feet.
The orbit of the eye is strikingly small, covering about
one fourth of the area contained within the orbit of modern
man. On Plate 2, Fig. 1 is shown the comparison between an
orbit of these people (formed by the right supra-orbital rim
of the older woman and the zygoma of the younger woman)
compared with the orbit of a modern Indian man taken
from a shelter cavern. The minimum templar width of the
Indian is 92 mm., and that of the young woman is estimated
at 98 mm.
It is also to be noted that the suture between the orbital
rim (Fronto-sphenoidal process) and the zygoma is close
to the supra-orbital notch and well upon the rim. (The position on Plate 2, Fig. 1 is exaggerated.) This again suggests
the extinct lemur. It has been noted from several skeletal
remains found by the writer that this suture has receded
from this position regularly until in the modern Indian
cave man shown here it is nearly in the normal position of
modern man.
The parietals bend sharply inward at pterion, so that
the broad low vault may conform to what is evidently a
narrow maxilla. The squamatic suture forms a low, long
arch, the type to conform to the low squashed down and flat
parietals and frontals. The frontal is very short. This feature,
together with the small orbits, cause the vertex of the line
marking the .biporionic vertical height to fall behind the
bregma as in modern man. The lateral sinus passes around
the hinder, inferior angle of the parietal in two cases; the
others have not been found. This feature has been observed
in other skulls of the southwestern United States, occasion-

®

®

®

pLA’P I~ 2

Skeletal Remains o] Man and Extinct Animals

15

ally cutting across the angle of the parietal and in others
going around it.
The antrum or nasal sinus of the young woman merits
attention. It is compared with that of a modern cave man,
associated with the Yuma type knife, and the sinus of a
young man of the third interglacial period (Plate 3, Figs.
1, 2, and 3, respectively). It is well known that the size of
the sinus increases with the age of the individual at the
expense of the walls surrounding it. The sinus floor usually
extends from the third to the first molar, occasionally to
both premolars. The sinus floor reached the roof of the
alveolar process in the region of the third molar (which
was about to erupt) and extended upward to the upper rim
of the nasal aperture. This left a spongy mass of bone from
the third molar region forward, which continued medially
between the palate and the floor of the nasal cavity. Viewed
from above, the floor of the nasal cavity is concave and the
palate convex so that only along the mid-line between the
halves of the maxilla does the bone become as thin as found
in modern man. The palate is smooth. This feature is perhaps more unusual than significant except that it is believed
to indicate a very prominent alveolar prognathism. This
is confirmed by the obtuse angle of the ascending ramus and
the body of the mandible. The dental arcade is V-shaped.
The body of the mandible is smooth, laterally and medially, and the border is rounded. A slight mylo-hyoid ridge
extends forward to the first molar and from there to the
symphysis is a slight groove. The alveolar cavity remains
open in the old man’s jaw (Plate 1, Fig. 2a), and the lower
border is rounded as in the young woman (Plate 1, Fig. 2b).
Prominent muscular attachments are noted about the region of the gonion. T~is is confirmed by the unusual wear
of the molars. Both women had two lower molars. The premolars had a peculiar polish and were still rounded. They
were not used for grinding food, but rather for shredding
it so that the molars could grind it more easily. This feature
is also found in the people from the third interglacial period.
The molars were not particularly different from those of

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

modern man except for the extra-ordinary thickness of the
dentyne, which is three or four times as thick as that of the
modern cave Indians. The lower borders of the body of the
mandible rises upward at the symphysis to form an arch,
incisura submentalis (Plate 1, Fig. 2b).
The region of the ramus about the mandibular foramen
exhibits either no mylo-hyoid groove or a very shallow and
faint groove. The lingula, a platelet of bone which overhangs the lower rim of the foramen in modern man, is lacking. To this platelet are attached the sinews of the pharynx.
The lingula exists in a very rudimentary form in these
mandibles. It is a mere tip rising up from the upper or forward rim of the foramen. It is well removed from the rim.
The gradual shifting of the tip to form the modern lingula
has been observed in the closer approach to the rim in the
mandibles from the third interglacial period and the platelet begins to form and overhang the rim in the mandible
from the fourth glacial period, finally reaching the position
of modern man in the postglacial cave Indian (Plate 3, Figs.
4 and 5; Plate 2, Fig. 4a and 4b).
The mylo-hyoid groove in the mandible from the fourth
glacial period is covered over in part of its length with a
sheath of bone (Plate 3, Fig. 4). This seems to indicate that
the mylo-hyoid nerve and vessel was at some prior time
extricating itself from its imprisonment within the body of
the mandible. It is but a step backward to the showing of
~wo foramina, as in the Piltdown and ape mandibles. The
fact that the covered groove occurs in two known specimens
(Plate 3, Fig. 4), one coming from the interval between the
Wurm :I and Wurm II glaciations, and the other probably
earlier, is believed to be due to a reversion to a former type
b6cause of the hatdships of the glacial periods mentioned.
This reversion to a former type is not unknown to students
of paleontology. These physical facts lend support to the
theory that the Piltdown jaw belongs to the skull although
the skull of the young woman supports the British workman’s description of that skull as a brown "kokernut."
The,shelter caverns here reflect the fact that the .fourth

Skeletal Remains oS Man and Extinct Animals

19

glacial period was one of extreme dryness, except for a
slight interval, between Wurm I and Wurm II. Whether the
climate was cold is not shown. There were probably extremes of heat and cold. If this section, about thirty degrees
north latitude, was a desert of such nature that animals and
plant life could not be supported, then all animals drifted
either north to a wet fringe or toward the tropics where
moisture was plentiful during this period. Along the northern fringe, animals could have drifted either west or east.
The presence of extinct animals in a more northern latitude
does not mean that such presence was contemporaneous
with the presence of the same animals in this latitude. There
was little inducement for a migration into this section during the Iast glacial period. The close of ~this period is marked
in the caverns here by. evidence of excessive rainfall, which
might have meant that the same precipitation in the form
of ice, snow, and sleet freezing and covering the ground in
more northern latitudes caused the extinction of the mastodon, horse, camel, and other animals which once roamed
North America. According to the cavern evidence here, the
end of the glacial period came suddenly.
The various features of the skull fragments of the people
in question, such as the long low arch of the equamous
suture, dove tail flanging, the rounded occiput and sloping
curved nuchal plane, light supra-orbital ridges, and many
other features mentioned suggest the Piltdown, Swanscombe, and other skulls found, but whether there is a racial
affinity is a matter for future years and further-discoveries.
The race or perhaps phylum of these people is marked. An
inspection of the tibia reveals faintly but unmistakably that
these people are ancient Indians of the southwestern part of
North America.
The shift in the position of the lingula, and the development of the mylo-hyoid groove probably accompanied an
improvement in the swallowing efficiency of the pharynx
and the further development of the oral digestive system.
The exhibits of such skeletal features do not constitute a
case for definite antiquity. If the theory is correct, the man-

2O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

dible of the Eskimaux, before the advent of the white man,
should show some interesting facts. The teeth of the people
under discussion showed~.neither cavities nor pyorhhea. The
same theory accounts for the modern type of wear and nature of the teeth exhibited by the Mauer jaw. The Heidelberg man and his ancestors could have stayed more closely
at home and have subsisted principally on grass seeds, rather
than on food from the chase.
The typical and theoretical ancestor of ape and man (if
such animal is ever identified) would be neither of the two
but would possess physical capabilities of producing either
descendant under a suitable environment. If the conditions
of food and other surroundings had not changed, then neither
of the two would have evolved. The theoretical ancestor
would have continued its existence and there would have
been no one to have known about him. If the subsequent
conditions of living had been favorable to the development
of the ape, such would (and did) result. A dissimilar but
favorable environment would have resulted in the evolution of man. The ape probably needed four hands to place
food in his mouth, thus efficiently gathering all the fruit and
such like food within reach of the numerous hands without
moving the body about.
Under a favorable environment suitable for the development of man and isolated from an environment which would
in like manner have been suitable for the evolution of the
ape, there is no reason that man should not have evolved
without the development of an ape. The treeless plains of
North America were not suitable for the evolution of the
ape, but were suitable for the ancestor who "took a chance"
on the ground. Under such conditions, man could have come
into being. Too little is known at this time about the matter
to form the basis of a very serious argument, but eventually
the ancestry of both will be traced further into the remote
past than it has been hitherfore believed possible.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF LAVON AND

GARZA-LITTLE ELM RESERVOIRS:
A PRELIMINARY REPORT
ROBERT L. ST~PH~NSOZ~
Introduction~
The Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the Army, has begun
work on four dams and reservoirs on the upper drainage of
the Trinity River. Benbrook Dam on the Clear Fork of the
Trinity in Tarrant County is small and a brief investigation
of the area showed that no archaeological material was to
be losi by inundation. Grapevine Dam on Denton Creek in
Denton and Tarrant Counties is also small and a brief investigation showed no significant archaeological material
was to be lost by flooding. Garza-Little Elm Dam on Elm
Fork of the Trinity in Denton County, and Lavon Dam on
East Fork of the Trinity in Collin County are both moderately large, and extensive surface surveys of the areas to be
flooded revealed considerable archaeological material. It is
with these latter two reservoirs that the present paper will
deal.
Garza-Little Elm Dam is located one mile north of the
Town of Lewisville, Texas. When completed it will be 125
feet high with 32,700 feet of earth embankment and 600 feet
of concrete spillway forming a reservoir to be used for flood
control and water conservation. This reservoir will have a
surface area of 66,100 acres at an elevation of 553 feet M.S.L.,
and will affect the present river level 21 miles upstream on
Elm Fork, 17 miles upstream on Little Elm Creek and 13
miles upstream on Hickory Creek, completely inundating the
present Lake Dallas. Impounding of water in this reservoir
will probably begin in August, 1952.z
Lavon Dam is locate~l fhree miles northeast of the Town
1 Permission of the Smlthsonlan Institution for publication of this article
has been kindly granted the writer by Dr. Frank H, PI. Roberts, Jr.
2 Data furnished by the Fort Worth Suboffice, Corps of Engtnoers. Fort
Worth, Texas.

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of Wylie, Texas. When completed it will be 69 feet high with
8,972 feet of earth embankment and 568 feet of concrete
spillway forming a reservoir with a water surface area of
24,190 acres at an elevation of 496 feet M.S.L. This will affect
the present river level 10 miles upstream on the East Fork
and 14 miles upstream on Pilot Grove Creek. Impounding of
water will probably begin in August, 1951.~
The streams on which these reservoirs are being built
form the headwaters of the Trinity River, one of the series
of large rivers flowing in a southeasterly direction across
Texas to empty into the Gulf of Mexico. The East Fork and
Elm Fork are relatively small branches of the main stream,
but at flood stage frequently attain a width of 300 feet or
more. Their immediate channels are normally quite narrow
and seldom over 5 feet or i0 feet deep. Each, however, is cut
into an older channel of one-half to one mile in width, the
latter being filled with alluvial sediments. The entire area
lies in the upper reaches of the Coastal Plains physiographic
province. The Elm Fork area forms the border between the
low, rolling hills of the Eastern Cross Timbers Region to
the east and the Grand Prairie Region to the west. The East
Fork area is entirely within the Eastern Cross Timbers
Region. The basic geologic formations in the Elm Fork area
are Woodbine sandstones and the Eagle Ford formation,
while the East Fork area is largely composed of Taylor NIarl.4
In both areas the soil is principally a heavy, black, silty clay
but in the western parts of the Elm Fork area this gives
way to a light brown sand. Natural vegetation consisting of
typical southern river bottom hardwoods, vines and brambles is quite heavy along both stream channels while the
areas a few hundred yards from the streams are under cultivation, or in pasture. This land has been cultivated for
50-100 years prior to which time it was partially timbered,
particularly in the East Fork area. Cotton, corn, maises, and
peanuts are the principal present day crops.
Under the direction of Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., Dio
Idem,
Data based on Ralz, Erwi~0 :t939 and

Fenneman, N. IV~.o 1931.

,: :(

LAVON R£~RVO;H , Co~ ,

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

rector of the River Basin Surveys, the write~" made a~ archaeological survey of the areas to be flooded by these two
reservoirs. This project is a part of the River Basin Surveys,
a cooperative program of archaeological salvage between the
National Park Service and the Corps of Engineers, and is
under the direction and supervision of the Smithsonian Institution. The survey was begun on Augu~st 2, 1948 and
brought to completion on September 17, 1948. A total of 25
sites in the Lavon area and 27 sites in the Garza-Little Elm
area were examined and surface collections made from them.
Some minor test trenching was carried out in the former
area. Eight sites in the Lavon area and seven sites in the
Garza-Little Elm area proved to be of major significance
in the interpretation of the pre-history of this region. These
sites have been recommended for further excavation and
are described below. In the interest of brevity, the remaining 37 sites which are relatively insignificant are not described here.
Summary Tabulation o] all SAtes
Lavon
Early lithic sites ....................................................... 0
Late non-pottery sites ...................................... 13
Small pottery-bearing camps coeval with
late Fulton Aspect ........................................... 5
Large pottery,bearing villages coeval with
late Fulton Aspect ................................................ 6
Double occupation sites .......................................... (?)
Artificial mound sites ............................................... 1 (?)

Garza
1
10
17
4
5
0

Acknowledgments
To the Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the U. S. Army, and
to the National Park Service, Dept. of the Interior, is due
sincere appreciation for providing funds to make these surveys possible. During the course of the surveys the District
Office, Sub-office and field Offices of the Corps of Engineers
were most cooperative and extended every possible assistance to the survey. The many landowners and local collectors were very helpful. The members of the Dallas
Archaeological Society, who for a number of years have col:

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Li$tle Elm Reservoirs

25’

lected extensively in this area and kept accurate records,
made all of their collections, notes and data available for
study. Members of this group, especially R. K. Harris, Lester
Wilson, and Rex Housewright extended most generous
hospitality to the writer and gave unstintingly of their
time in field assistance and discussion of problems.

The

Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, extended is complete facilities to the survey, including laboratory
and storage space, file information and valuable technical
advice and criticism. To all of these people and organizations is due deep and sincere gratitude.
Garza-Little Elm Sitess
41-I8C7-3, Lake Dallas Site. This site is located in alarge
sand dune area one mile below the present Lake Dallas.
It is partly destroyed by wind action on the sand, but one
section remains that may still show stratigraphy. Two
periods of occupation are implied here on the basis of artifact
types. The earlier period is indicated by a group of lanceolate
projectile points, including several of the Plainview type,e
and some unnamed types that are often found in association
with early lithic sites. A large number of net sinkers were
also found here.~ Occasional specimens of these artifacts
are often found in relatively modern sites. However, here
a large enough group was found in a single site to indicate
actual occupation of the site by the people who made these
artifacts. The major occupation of the site is indicated by
Gary, Sterrett, Trinity and Ellis Stemmed projectile points,
gouge-shaped scrapers, several large, barbed blades, many
flake scrapers, reworked projectile point scrapers and a
boatstone fragment but no pottery. These artifacts imply a
later, pre-pottery occupation similar to that found in many
sites of east and east-central Texas.e The artifacts imply
an occupation of this site at a very early period followed at
a much later time by a pre-pottery occupation probably
5
w|th
6
7
8

Artifacts collected in the present survey are reported here. together
those collected by members of the D. A~ ~. in past years.
Krieger, A. D., 1947, pp. 939-942.
Watt, F. H., 1938.
Stephenson, R. I~., 1948, pp. 69-70.

26

Texas Archeo~ogical and PaleontoIogica~ Society

coeval with or just preceeding Gibson Aspect times.~ It
will be extremely important if stratigraphy can be found
here and the true sequence of these artifact types determined.
41-18C7-2, Ledbetter Site. On a high, sandy ridge 100 yards
west of Elm Fork, this site is 1½ miles above the damsite.
Potsherds are relatively plentiful and are 60% of the plain
shell tempered type. Only 10% are de.corated and none are
definitely identifiable by type. The clay tempered sherds
generally appear to be of Frankston Focus types,o while
the shell tempered sherds are similar to the Nocona Plain
ware of Henrietta Focus. ,, The shell tempered sherds are
of two kinds; those in which shell fragments are visible and
those with small cavities resulting from the leaching of the
tempering material. This ware is referred to here as vesicular.~ Projectile points while few in number are largely
arrow point types with Alba Barbed predominating. The
small, triangular and triangular side-notched points are very
rare in the surface collections. Scrapers, celts, drills, and
other artifacts are similar to those associated with the FuIton Aspect. The presence of shell tempered potsherds in
combination with apparently Frankston Focus types and
other artifacts that seem to represent that focus may indicate the presence of a group of people who borrowed traits
from both the Frankston and the Henrietta foci but were,
themselves, of neither. There are indications of at least one
house structure and several burials in the site.
41-I8C4-3, Brown Site. This site is located on a high, sand
and clay ridge on the east bank of Little Elm Creek. The
surface collections here show some differences from those
of most sites in this reserv-oir. Potsherds are only 21% shell
tempered. Clay tempered sherds are largely engraved with
some incised, plain and punctate decorations appearing.
Projectile points are predominantly arrow point types over
half of which are of the Alba Barbed type. Large blades and
9 Kelley, J. C., 1947, pp. 103-104.
I0 Krieger, A. :D., 1946, pp.
11 Krleger, A. D., 1946, pp. 109-111.
12 See discussion of this vesicular ~vare under the Pottery
this report.

section

of

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gouge-shaped scrapers are very prominent here. Probably
a double occupation of the site is represented, the earlier of
which was derived from the central Texas area,,3 the later
from the Caddoan area.,4
41-17D6-3, Cagle Site. On the east bank of Elm Fork, this
site is at the extreme northern end of the Reservoir area.
Numerous burials are reported here by the landowner, including one group burial of "several skeletons." In this group
burial were found "many beads" which have Since been lost
and the material from which they were made is unknown.
The land owner stated that artifacts and graves from the
eastern side of the site differed from those that were found
in the flat flood plain area near the river. He thought the
latter were more recent. Informants reported pottery, arrow
points and dart points from the site. However, due to a
heavy cover of grass, few artifacts were collected in the
present survey and definition of the site is at present only
presumed. The eastern section of the site is a vertebrate
fossil locality.
41-17D9-11 Pearsall Site. On the south side of Hickory
Creek, this site occupies the top of a small sandstone bluff
and represents a large village of the late pottery period. Artifacts are similar to those found at the Ledbetter site. One
sherd of Tonto Polychrome ware,, from southern Arizona
(Pueblo IV period) was found at this site. The soil here is.
shallow and excavation would be useless. It is recommended
that a further search be made of the surface area and the top
few inches of the entire site for other Puebloan artifacts.~
Such trade items are extremely useful dating tools. Presumably only one period of occupation is represented in this site.
41-18C4-1, Little Elm Site. One mile northwest of the
Town of Little Elm on a large sand and clay ridge on the
east side of Little Elm Creek is another small village site
13 Kelley, J. C. n. d.
14 Krieger, A. D., 1946, pp.
15 Identification by :Dr. Florence Hawley, Univ. of New Mexico.
16 In slto 41-I’/D9-1 (now inundated by Lake Dallas) a projectile, point o~
obsldlan wo~ found some years ago by 1~. K. Ha~Tls. This is undoubtedly"
another Puebloan trade item.

Survey oS Lavon and Garza-Little Ebn Reservoirs

of the late pottery period. Artifacts are similar to those
from the Ledbetter site. Some future excavation is recommended in this site as it represents the small pottery-bearing
villages of the area.
41-!7D6-4, Landtrip Site. This site, on the eastern flood
plain of Elm Fork, is located at the upper end of Lake Dallas.
It seems to be only a small temporary campsite but several
sherds found here are extremely interesting. Most of these
sherds are of Frankston Focus wares, but one may be Ripley
Engraved ware of Titus Focus.17 Three others are entirely
foreign to this area.Is More surface collecting and some test
trenching is recommended to locate additional foreign pottery types, and to place them in the cultural context of the
area.
Lavon Sites’9
41-18D4-1, Farmersville SAte. This site is located along a
low terrace on the west side of Pilot Grove Creek, five miles
northwest of the Town of Farmersvflle. Local collectors have
gathered artifacts here for many years.2o No excavations
have been made except for some minor test pits and recovery of a few plow-struck burials. These burials are all flexed.
Some are single interments; other double. Orientations are
to both the east and the west. In each grave, mussel shells,
charcoal and often red ocher were found. Bone beads ac-companled one infant burial. Bison scapula hoes (6 with
sockets, 2 without sockets) were found in one adult grave.2~’
These were placed in a group in front of the body and on tol~
of a prepared bed of charcoal. This is the only evidence of:
Bison so far recovered in this area, and it is the only buriaI.
furniture found. (The beads were probably ornaments worn
by the deceased and not true grave furniture.)
A large ceremonial pit is located in the southern part of
17 Identification tentative.
18 Dr. James B. Griffin, Univ: of Michigan, examined these sherds and
was uncertain of -their exact identity but suggested that they might
Mississippi ~v’alley wares; one Early Baytown and two of a late period.
19 Artifacts collected in the present survey are reported here,
with those collected by members of the D. A~ S. in past years.
20 Harris, R. K., 1945" 194~; 1948 and Wilson, L. L., 1946.
21 Harris, R.K., 1948: p. 40.

30

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

this site.~. It is roughly 100 feet in diameter and the rim is
1 foot-6 feet above the present surface of the center of the pit.
It was excavated into the eastern slope of the terrace and the
native soil of the terrace forms part of the west wall of the
pit. Cultivation and erosion have destroyed most of the pit
outline. There is evidence of numerous house structures in
the site in the form of many fragments of burned, wattleimpressed daub.
Pottery artifacts include two pipe stem fragmentS; a fragment of a small, thin-bowled, long-stemmed pipe; a clay ball
the size of a marble, and containing a groove and partial
perforation; and two small cylindrical objects, possibly parts
of an effigy bowl. One vessel was reconstructed from sherds.
It is a clay tempered, buff colored bottle with incised decoration. The design element ~is repeated four times around
the body (a Fulton Aspect feature). It has a flat bottom.
The neck has been broken off at the top but shows wear
from re-use after having been broken.~3 Potsherds are not
numerous-in the site. Of 1170 artifacts recovered only 186
are potsherds. These represent 40-50 individual vessels.
Scarcity of pottery is further attested by re-use of the
above-mentioned bottle. Shell temper occured in 42% of
the sherds, clay temper in 55%, and limestone temper in 3%.
Nearly all of the shell tempered sherds are undecorated,
none are vesicular, 2, and five possess a red film. The clay
tempered sherds are 34% plain. Red filmed, brushed, punctate, incised and engraved decorations occur. None are positively identifiable by type but the majority seem to be of
Frankston Focus wares. A few sherds reminiscent of older
22 See description of one of these pits in site 41-18C9-1 in this report.
23 This bottle is of a form common tn the Caddoan area in Fulton Aspect
times ~nd according to Krieger the design is ~aberrant and difficult to
identify with any specific tYPe, He believes it may belong to the Bossier
Focus, See Webb, C. PI., 1948, Plate 11, Fig. 1.
24 See dtsc(~Sston of "vesicular ware" in the Pottery section of this report.

PLATE
A~ Excavation at Campbell Hole Site, Lavon Reservoir. View looking
into test pit No. 2. ~Wilson standing, on bottom of upper level. Housewright
working in house pit and brushing off-clay flrehearth. /kugust 29, 1948.
B. View looking southwest toward :Bullock Mound, Lavon Reservoir.
Northeast edge of mound ts marked by small tree,, Stream flows through
timbered area in background. July 21, 1948.

Pl~te 6

Survey oS Lavon and Garza-Lit-tle Elm Reservoirs

33.

wares were found. Of the six limestone tempered sherds, one
is undecorated; two are vessel bottoms and are basketryimpressed; three are incised.
Artifacts of bone, shell and antler are abundant. Notable
among these is a bone atlatl hook, a perforated bear tooth
pendant, the bison scapula hoes mentioned above and a
large number of bone pins.
.The projectile points are 62% small, arrow point types
of the sort that are usually found in Fulton Aspect sites.
However, 16% are triangular or triangular side-notched
specimens of the type usually associated with Henrietta Focus. Dart points are mostly of the types found in Fulton
Aspect sites, principally Gary Stemmed. Scrapers, drills, and
blades are of types common to many Texas cultures.
The surface collections and features of this site differ
markedly from the culture patterns established for any of
the known loci of this or surrounding areas. The site is similar in most ~letails to other large East Fork pottery-bearing
sites. These sites appear to represent a focus of the Fulton
Aspect that has not previously been described. Excavation
in the undisturbed section of this site and test trenching
elsewherein it will add greatly to the ultimate definition
and description of this focus.
41-18D4-2, Bullock Mound. One mile northeast of the
Farmersville site, on Indian Creek is an eliptical knoll 15 feet
high, 270 feet long and 200 feet wide. It appears to be a terraced mound, the upper section of which is 10 feet high and
100 feet in diameter. No artifacts were found on or surroundingthis mound~ but some sherds and projectile points are
reported. Shell, bone and flint refuse was seen on the surface of the:mound and around the base. A test trench should
be cut in{b the mound to determine whether or not it is

artificial.
41-18D7-2, Campbell Hole Site. Located three miles northeast o£:=:~he Town of Wylie, on the south bank of the East
25 Artlf.lclal mounds of the Lower l~Itssisslppi and Red
lack surface artifacts.

frequently

River "Valleys

34

Texas Archeological and Paleon$ologica~ Society

Fork, this site covers two acres immediately adjacent to
the present stream channel. A slight ridge and shallow depression occupy the center of the site. Both are the result
of erosion and deposition due to river overflow. The entire
site is covered with dense, stream bottom vegetation. The
East Fork has cut its channel southward and encroached
upon the northern edge of the site, exposing a 15 foot vertical
bank on the south side of the channel. Here occupational
material is exposed to a depth of nearly five feet. Approximately a foot of the alluvial soil has been deposited over
the entire site by periodic inundation since the site was oc~
cupied. As a result almost no surface material is to be found
except in the eroded bank and in the shallow depression
mentioned above. One day was spent by the writer, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. L. L. Wilson and Mr. Rex Housewright, in excavating a test trench into the exposed bank.
This was an extension of a previous test pit begun by members of the D. A. S. Occupational material was found to
be stratified into two zones. The upper zone, including
6 inches-18 inches of sterile topsoil varies in thickness from
12 inches to 36 inches. The lower zone varies in thickness
from 6 inches-24 inches. Below that level is completely
sterile soil. A house floor appeared at the junction of
the upper and lower zones at a depth of 36 inches, and
contained a well defined fire hearth of burned clay. Presuming the house tobe circular and the hearth to be in the
center, the structure would be about 12 feet in diameter,
with a flat floor curving sharply upward at the base of the
walls. No post holes were found but burned, wattle-impressed, daub fragments were abundant about the edges of
the house floor. This agrees in many respects with a house
site excavated in 1946-47 by the D. A. S. in the Butler Hole
PLATE
A. Projectile points from Lake Dallas Site, Garza-Ltttie Elm Reservoir.
1-3 type Sterrott Stemmed; 4 type Orla Expanding Stem; 5-7 type Slsterdale
Shouldered; 8-11 type Pl~vlew; 12-15 Miscellaneous d~t poin~ of the
early ll~ic.
B. ~Ifac~ ~om ~e Dallas Site.
1~ notched stones or "Waco
Sinker;" 4~5 ]~ge~ gouge-shaped scrapers m~e of ferruginous sandstone;
~-9 ~uge-~haped scrapers of flint.

Plate

Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

37

Site some five miles downstream.2~ Time did not permit
excavation of more than a cross sectional face of the house
floor and fire hearth, which probably accounts for the lack
of post holes. It was not definitely determined whether one
of the ceremonial pits occurs in this site.
Pottery was extremely scarce in this site but this was
probably due in part to the inability to make surface collections. Except for one shell t~mpered sherd, all pottery
came from the upper zone. The shell tempered sherds
(nearly 50% of the total) are more nearly like the Nocona
Plain ware of Henrietta Focus than are any of the sherds
from other sites in either the East Fork or Elm Fork drainage. One clay-tempered bottle neck (nearly complete} is
unidentifiable but has a constricted opening reminiscent of
bottles of Spiro Fine-Engraved ware.27 Engraved pendant
triangles decorate tl~e base of the neck. None of the sherds
were positively identifiable by type.
Artifacts of bone occurred in both zones. All of the bone
pins, however, are from the upper zone; bone beamers, the
single bone flaker, and 8 of the 9 bone awls are from the
lower zone. All of the other flaking tools and the single
conch shell, disc bead are also from the lower zone.
In summary it may be said that this is a double occupation
site with probably little time elapsing between the two occupations, and both by people with similar but gradually
changing culture patterns. No burials were found. A house
structure with a central fire hearth of clay was found. A
ceremonial pit may or may not have been present in the
site. Pottery is of both clay and shell temper, but is not
abundant and is confined to the upper zone. The entire site
is probably preserved intact beneath a capping of depositional soil. The culture represented here cannot be identified with any known loci, but influence is seen from the
Caddoan area and the Henrietta Focus.
41-I8D7-8, Highpoint Site. One mile east of the Clearlake
26 Y:IoUsewrlght, Rex., et al., 1947, pp. 8-16. See also Webb, C. PI., 1940.
~70rr, I~. G., 1946, Plate X~VIII, Fig. b. Also Krieger, A.D., 1946, Fig. 19e.

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Community on the east side of Pilot Grove Creek, this site
represents one of the small, temporary, pottery-bearing
campsites in the East Fork drainage. It is recommended for
further excavation as a representative of this type of small
Site in the Lavon area.
41-18D7-9, Pilot Grove Site. This site covers five acres of
the east side of Pilot Grove Creek, ½ mile south of the confluence of Pilot Grove and Sister Grove Creeks. In the present flood plain, it is subject to frequent inundation and is
largely cover.ed with alluvium. Only a few artifacts were
found in the present survey but these artifacts, midden
refuse, wattle-impressed daub, and the general plan of the
site indicate that this is another of the large pottery-bearing
sites in the East Fork drainage.
41-18C9-1, Hogge Bridge Site. On the east side of East Fork,
three miles northeast of the Town of Wylie, this site covers
3 acres or more of the present river flood plain. Midden refuse was found scattered over most of the site; house structures were indicated by numerous fragments of wattle-impressed daub; and a large ceremonial pit2e occupies the center of the site.
This pit 2~ is a large, circular, concave depression in the
surface of the site with an earthen embankment completely
enclosing it. It is 90 feet in diameter and 2 feet to 4.5 feet
deep (erosion due to cultivation and periodic flooding has
reduced the rim unevenly making it higher on the east
side than on the west). A test trench 3o across this pit
showed the original depth to be roughly 8.5 feet to 9
feet with a concave floor sporadically covered with refuse. No post holes were found but some evidence of a
superstructure is indicated in fragments of wattle-impressed daub. The purpose of such a pit is unknown.
Perhaps it was an out-door dance or ceremonial arena.
Possibly it contained a large semi-subterranean corn28 Wilson, L. I~., 1946, Pl). ll-IP..
29 Stephenson, JR. L., ]949.
30 1%. K. Harris. Mr. and Mrs. L. L. Wilson. I-Ienry Hanna, Jr., J. B.
Sollberger, Mr. and Mrs ,1%obert lqatzenbuehler and C 1%-Allen very kindly
assisted the writer in this 2-day excavation, as a project of the D. A. S.

Survey o] Lavon and GarzaoLi~tle Elm Reservoirs

39

munity house. Certainly it was large enough to have had
some function in which all or most of the inhabitants of the
village could share. The feature is common to nearly all of
the large, pottery-bearing sites in the East Fork drainage,
a single such pit occuring in each site. Similar pits are unknown elsewhere to the writer. The term "ceremonial pit"
has been applied to this feature merely as a matter of convenience in reference.
The potsherds from this site are 55% clay tempered. The
majority are undecorated but fingernail punctate, brushed
and incised decorations appear on some sherds. Probably
5-10 individual vessels are represented in the clay tempered
group. Shell tempered, plain sherds are nearly as abundant
as the clay tempered and probably an equal number of
vessels is represented. There is some evidence of an orange
film on some of the sherds both of clay and of shell temper.
Pottery is not abundant here and probably all sherds represent trade wares, although actual types were not identifiable.3,
Small arrow point types comprise 55% of the projectile
points. The type Alba Barbed is dominant but some are of
the small triangular form. The larger dart points are all
of types also found in the Caddoan area. Drills are all small,
with shaped bases and these and other lithic artifacts are
of common types identifiable with no particular culture
complex. Numerous artifacts of bone, including a bone hook,
bone pins and a carved human ~ooth were found, but artifacts of shell and antler were rare. The only shell artifact of
note is a fragment of an undecorated, conch shell gorget.
The general cultural context of this site appears to be
similar to that of the other major pottery-bearing sites along
East Fork and quite distinct from any of the known loci
of this or surrounding areas. Pottery was probably not made
here but was obtained in small quantity from neighboring
groups. Further excavation of the ceremonial pit and parts
81 I-Iarri~. I~o 1:~. 19~6, ’pp. 119-114.

4O

Texas Archeo~ogical and Paleontological Society

of the village will provide important information regarding
this culture.
41-18C9-2, Branch Site. This three-acre site occupies a low,
sandy ridge in the eastern edge of the East Fork flood plain,
~ mile southwest of Branch store. Cultivation has lowered
the surface of the site by a foot or more and resulted in
a slight change in the artifact types found in surface collections. For example projectile points collected a number of
years ago were predominantly arrow point types, while
those collected recently are predominantly dart point types.
Thus a stratified site seems to be indicated. House structures ~re indicated by fragments of wattle-impressed daub.
A ceremonial pit is located near the center of the site. Potsherds are predominantly plain, shell tempered ware, but
clay tempered wares comprise 44% of the sherds found.
The only decorated sherds are of an incised ware. Probably
20-25 individual vessels are represented in the sherd collections. Projectile points, both dart and arrow point types
are typically Caddoan but a single, small, triangular point
was found. Other lithic artifacts are of types common to
many known loci. Artifacts of bone, shell and antler were.
found in small numbers and are of types common to sites
of the East Fork drainage.
This site is another of the pottery-bearing villages of the
East Fork area. The original surface of the site is not apparent so stratigraphy probably cannot be determined here,
but probably existed in the past. Excavation should be undertaken here to locate the house structures and burials and
to substantiate the artifact complex that the surface collections imply.
41-18C9-5, McGuire Si~e. This site, on the slope of a large
PLATE
A. Dart points from Farmersvllle Site, Lavon Reservoir. Typical pottery site artifacts. 1-16 type Gary Stemmed; 17 type Sterrett Stemmed; 18
type Orla Expanding Stem; 19-20 type Ellis Stemmed; 21-23 Mtscella~eous
forms.

B. Projectile point types from Garzo.-Little Elm Reservoir. I-8 Miscellaneous small dart points, tent~tlve type Trinity Stemmed; 9-11 type
Ga~" Stemmed; 12-13 type Ellis Stemmed; 14 type Perdlz Pointed Stem;
15-23 type Alba Barbed; 24-27 side-notched, tr|a.ngular arrow points; 28
Serrated ~dged arrow point; 29-32 triangular oxrow points.

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-LittZe Elm Reservoirs

43

gravel ridge on the east side of East Fork is 4 miles northeast of the Town of Wylie. Refuse is abundant on the site
but no potsherds nor small arrow points have been found.
It seems to be a campsite of a non-pottery culture.
PoPery
Garza-Little Elm Area. No complete vessels or pottery
artifacts other than potsherds were found. Sherds were
found in 9 sites and totaled 271 in number, or 21% of the
1270 artifacts recovered. Sherds were reported from 12 additional sites making a total of 21 pottery sites out of the
27 sites located. These sherds are dominantly shell tempered
(55%), none of which are d~corated in any way. However,
they seem to be of two varieties: plain ware with a heavy
percentage of coarse, shell temper; and plain ware with
"hole temper." The former is either Nocona Plain ware of
the Henrietta Focus~2 or a very similar ware. It is, though,
of a wider range of shades and colors than the typical Nocona Plain ware and usually of poorer quality with a smaller
percentage of shell temper. The latter is here called "vesicular." It is very similar to the shell tempered ware in
color, paste, thickness, and surface treatment, but is somewhat softer. The temper of this ware is usually entirely
missing and is replaced by small, pin-head sized cavities,
giving a vesicular appearance to the sherd. Some sherds
contain combinations of this vesicular structure and shell
temper. It may be that this is merely a shell tempered ware,
which has had all or most of the shell leached out by a
Chemical action of the soil. On the other hand the vesicular
appearance of the sherds may be due to limestone temper
which burned out in the firing process or has otherwise
disintegrated. If so, some of the vessels were made with a
combination of both shell and limestone temper. This
vesicular ware constitutes 40% of the sherds from the GarzaLittle Elm area while the plain shell tempered ware constitutes only 15%. The remaining 45% of the sherds are
clay tempered and as a whole represent Caddoan types.s3
32 Krieger, A. D., :1946, pp. 109-111.
33 :Krieger, A. D., 1946, ;pp. 186-255.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The plain undecorated sherds (31%) probably represent the
body sherds of the decorated wares, although a plain ware
is also present as identified by a few plain rim sherds. The
decorated sherds (14%) contained engraved, incised, fingernail punctate and brushed decorations. All are small and
difficult to identify accurately. One Patton Engraved sherd
of historic Allen Focus and two Harleton Applique sherds
of Titus Focus were identified.3, One sherd is of a polished
redware; several are of unpolished redware; one is identified
as Tonto t)olychrome from southern Arizona and three oth~
ers seem to be Middle-Mississippi wares.3~ While exact type~
are not easily assignable to most of these clay tempered
sherds it is reasonably certain that most of the incised, punctate, engraved, and brushed wares are of Frankston Focus
types.
Lavon Area. Pottery was found in 9 sites in this area and
reported from 3 others, making a total of 12 pottery-bearing
sites. Sherds indicate that all 12 sites were probably coeval
and were also coeval with the pottery-bearing sites in the
Garza-Little Elm area.
Most of the pottery in the Lavon sites is in the form of
small potsherds, but one bottle of an unknown clay tempered ware was reconstructed and a pottery pipe bowl, a
clay bead, two pipe stems, and two small effigy fragmentss~
were also found. Vessel shapes indicated ~re few. Water
bottles certainly were present and probably even relatively
numerous. Other shapes that seem to be indicated are small
carrinated bowls, hemispherical bowls, shallow bowls, and
flat bottomed pots expanding in diameter toward the top:.
Pottery was not abundant (a total of 442 sherds were found
or less than 23% of the 1926 artifacts) and apparently was
sometimes used even after having been broken. However,
a wide variety of types was used. Clay tempered sherds are
dominant in the collections studied (52.6%). Of these nearly
34 I~:rleger0 A. D., 1946.
35 As tentatively identified by Griffin, See footnote lS of this paper.
36 These probably represent appendages of small effigies such as wer~
often Incorporated into the rim decorations of Frar~kston and Titus Focus
vessels.
:

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

45

two-thirds are decorated. Decorations consist of punctations,
incising, engraving, brushing and application of a red film.
Pottery types could not be identified but the majority of
the decorated sherds appear to be of Frankston Focus types.
Red filmed sherds may be of a Titus Focus type. Shell tempered sherds (45.8%) are nearly all undecorated and appear to be either of Nocona Plain ware or of a closely
related ware. Sherds of this type from the Lavon area are
more similar to the Nocona Plain type than are similar
sherds from the Garza-Little Elm area. In the Lavon area
only 13 sherds (2.9%) are vesicular. The unusual occurrence
of red filming on shell tempered Pottery was found in 16
sherds. Limestone tempered sherds numbered 6 or 1.4%
of all sherds. One of these is undecorated; 3 are incised and
2 are vessel bases bearing coiled basketry impressions.~7
These are reminiscent of pottery of the Grant Focus of
southern Oklahoma.
In both the Lavon and Garza-Little Elm areas, the combination of such factors in the pottery complex as: (1)
scarcity of pottery, (2) wide variety of types known to several other cultures, (3) relative inferiority of the wares as
compared to type specimens, and (4) re-use of broken vessels, leads one to believe that no pottery was manufactured
at these sites. All vessels were probably secured by trade
or other means from neighboring cultures. If so, a wide
range of trave! is indicated, extending for 50 to 100 miles
to the east, north and west. If pottery was manufactured
in these villages it was not an indigenous part of the culture
complex but rather was made by a few individuals who
came from neighboring areas. Such a situation could result
from intermarriage with the known pottery peoples.
Lithic Artifacts
Garza-LittIe Elm Area. The majority of the projectile
points from these sites are of types usually associated, in
varying proportions, with pottery sites throughout the Gibson and Fulton Aspects __in the Caddoan area. Alba Barbed,
37 Kr|eger, A. D., 1946, 1~. 132, refers to similar sherd-~ from ~ site on the
Red River.

46

Texas Archeological and PalesntoIogical Society

Gary Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed and Trinity Stemmed are
dominant types. Types found in late Balcones Phase sites
in central Texas are second in numerical significance. These
include Sterrett Stemmed, Orla Expanding Stem, Sisterdale
Shouldered, and a large, triangular type.3s The small, triangular and triangular side-notched arrow points commonly
associated with the Henrietta Focus, were also found here
in significant quantity. It will be noted that of the several
types listed, those thought to represent atlatl dart points
are dominant (68.9%) over the smaller, arrow point types
(31.1%). In one site, however, a completely different lithic
complex Occurs. Here a very early horizon is represented
by a series of lanceolate projectile points. In one other site
an obsidian projectile point of intermediate type was found
and is probably of Puebloan origin. Scraping tools are of
many types. Small reworked flake scrapers dominate.
Gouge-shaped scrapers made of flint and also of ferruginous
sandstone; small, well made, snub-nose scrapers; rejects;
and chopping implements were common throughout. Sew
eral four-bladed, beve]ed knives were found in the same
site with the obsidian projectile point. Unfortunately that
site is now inundated by Lake Dallas and no further work
can be done there. One mid-back-tang knife3, came from
site 41-18C4-1. Notched stones (or net sinkers) occurred in
two sites. Small flint drills with unshaped bases; small, triangular celts; one incised, perforated, slate pendant;4o a
boatstone fragment; several deeply grooved sandstone
abraders; and numerous manes and metate fragments complete the list of lithic artifacts.
Lavon Area. Few significant differences were noted in
~88 Kelley, J. C., n. d.
39 Patterson, J. T., 1930; pp. 12 and 44-75.
40 Harris. I:L I~:., 1936, I~P. 126-130.
PLATE
A~ Miscellaneous artifacts from Garza-Ltttle Elm Reservoir. 1-5 small,
snub-nose scrapers; 6 and 8 large flint drills; 7 engraved slate pendant; 9
mid-back-tang scraper; 10-11 beveled, four-bladed knives; 12 large, barbed
blade.
B. Artifacts of bone, shell and antler from Farmersville site, Lavon
Reservoir. 1 ulna awl; 2-11 bone pins; 12-13 bone beads; 14 perforated bear
tooth; 15 dog tooth; 16-19 antler flakers; 20 conch head; 21 conch columella;
22-24 shell artifacts; 25 bone awl; 26 turkey spur; 27 bone atlatl hook.

Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

49

the lithic artifacts from Lavon area sites designated as nonpottery and those in which pottery was found. There may
actually be typological differences within certain sites as is
indicated by the stratigraphy in the Campbell Hole site and
there undoubtedly are some differences between the pottery
and non-pottery sites. ,, Such differences will need to be
determined, though, on the basis of future, excavated material. At present the lithic artifacts from all sites in the
Lavon area can only be considered as a homogenous unit
in a single tabulation and typological differences noted. The
majority of the projectile points are of types usually associated, in varying proportions, with pottery sites throughout
the Gibson and Fulton Aspects in the Caddoan area. Alba
Barbed and Ga~ Stemmed types are dominant. The small,
triangular and triangular side-notched types commonly associated with Henrietta Focus occur in significant quantity
(8.0%).42 A few specimens of types found in the late Balcones Phase sites in central Texas were also found.,3 The
types thought to represent arrow points (57.5%) are dominant over the larger, atlatl dart point types (42.5%). Scraping tools are dominantly small flakes with one or more
chipped edges. Other scraping tools are small, snub-nose
scrapers and reworked projectile points of ~the Gary
Stemmed type. Small, triangular celts, boatstones, and a
few sherds of small stone vessels were found but not abundantly. In the Lavon area no artifacts representing the early
lithic horizon were found. Otherwise the lithic complexes
from %he two reservoir areas are very similar. The difference, however, lies in the relative shift in percentages of
types. The Lavon area produced more arrow point types
than dart point types. The reverse was found in the GarzaLittle Elm area.
Bone, Shell and Antler ArtiSacts
No artifacts of bone, shell or antler were found in the
Garza-Little Elm area nor have any been reported to the
41 Klrkland, Forrest, 1942, pp. 32-38.
42 See Wright, G. T., 1940 for suggestion of an Identification of these
projectile points with the Caddoan area.
43 Kelley, J. C., n. d.; See also S£ephenson, R. L.o 1947.

5O

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

writer. On the other hand a large number of these aritfacts
were found in the Lavon area. Antler tips were utilized as
flaking tools. Mussel shells with deep, narrow notches in the
edges were probably used as string softeners. Other mussel
shells were used as scraping tools. Some conch shell was
used in making simple ornaments. Bone was utilized extensively in the manufacture of pins; some short with
grooved ends; others ungrooved; and yet others very long
and slender often with engraved decorations. Awls, flaking
tools, beamers, fish hooks, atlatl hooks and beads were also
made of bone. Bison scapula hoes (found in a single instance as burial offerings) were the only evidence of bison
found in the area. Other animals whose bones were used as
artifacts were deer (95%), bear (tooth pendant), coyote
(or dog), and both large and small birds (beads). Shells
found are all (except the conch) of species that are now
living in the streams in that area.44
Summary and Speculations
Fifty-two archaeological sites were located in the areas
of these two reservoirs. Indications of their cultural content
and significance is derived solely from surface collections
and from some minor test trenching in some of the sites of
the Lavon area. Three chronological periods were isolated
and some information was obtained regarding each. The
earliest period is represented by a single site in the GarzaLittle Elm Reservoir (41-18C7-3).* This seems to be a campsite of the early lithic period and may be coeval (broadly
speaking) with the Plainview and other early sites of the
44 Land and freshwater shells identified by Robert J. Drake, University
0f New Mexico.
¯ Sites marked With an asterisk have been recommended for further excavation and are described in this report. Those sites that are not so marked
are relatively small and insignificant and no further work is recommended
in them. However, they do serve to fill out the cultural assemblage and
substantiate the information derived from the major sites.
PLATE 10
A. Unusual potsherds from Lavon Reservoir. 1-~ Marksvllle incised
(?); 4 Holly l~lne Engraved (?); 5 Pennington Puncture-Incised (?); 6-11
are limestone tempered; 10-11 are basketry-impressed vessel bottoms.
B. L~nusual potsherds from Garza-I~ittle Elm Reservoir. 1 late
sissippi Valley ware (?); 2 early Baytown ware (?); 3 late Mississippi
ley Red on Buff (?); 4 Tonto Polychrome sherd; 6-’/ Harleton Applique
sherds; 8 Patton Engraved sherd; 5 and 9-14 are the usual decorated types
of clay teml}ered sherds from this area~

Plate 10

Survey oS Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

53

southern plains. Plainview points, other early lanceolate
projectile point types and notched stones (or net sinkers)
serve to identify it. It is hoped that future excavation in
this site will provide a stratigraphic record and more identifying material from this site.
The intermediate period is represented in a later occupation of this site as well as occupation of nine additional sites
in the Garza-Little Elm area (41-18C7-5; 41-18C4-1"; 4118C4-3"; 41-17D9-1; 41-17D9-7; 41-17D9-8; 41-17D9-9; 41-17D62; 41-17D6-5). In the Lavon area this period is represented
in thirteen sites. (41-18D7-3; 41-18D7-4; 41-18D7-5; 41-18D7-6;
41-18D7-10; 41-18D7-11; 41-18D7-12; 41-18D7-13; 41-18D4-3;
41-18D4-5; 41-18C9-3; 41-18C9-5"; 41-18C9-7). No potsherds, nor small arrow point types were found in these
sites, nor can any house types or distinctive village features
be associated with them. Artifacts consist of large dart
point types of projectile points similar to those found in
Balcones Phase sites of central Texas (Sterrett Stemmed,
Orla Expanding Stem and Sisterdale Shouldered); triangular gouge-shaped scrapers; large, corner-notched blades;
roughly made chopping implements; and large flint drills.
The artifact lists from these sites are not as distinctive as
could be hoped for but lack of such items as pottery and
arrow point types is sufficient to differentiate the sites tentatively, until further work is done in the area. Apparently
".hese twenty-three sites in both reservoir areas are approxi.nately coeval, and are part of a widespread culture complex
embracing the major portion of east Texas from the Brazos
to the Sabine River and perhaps beyond. Too little is known
of the chronological position of these sites in northeastern
Texas to assign cultural affiliations at this time. Probably
an aspect of theBalcones Phase is represented as the artifact
types are similar to those found in central Texas aspects of
that phase. On the basis of Dr. J. Charles Kelley’s identification of certain foci and aspects of that phase,~ it seems
reasonable to assume that these sites occupy a chronological
period coeval with or possibly just prior to Gibson Aspect
times, perhaps sometime between 500 A. D. and 1,000 A. D.
Kelley, J. C., 1947, pp. 103-104.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The late period is represented in the Garza-Little Elm
area by re-occupation of four of the non-pottery sites (41I7D9-1; 41-18C4-1"; "41-18C4-3""; and 41-18C7-5;) and by occupation of seventeen additional sites (41-18C7-1; "41-18C72*"; 41-18C7-4; 41-18C7-6; 41-18C7-7; 41-18C7-8; 41-18C7-9; 4118C4-2; 41-17D3-1; 41-17D6-1; "41-17D6-3""; 41-17D6-4"; 4117D9-2; 41-17D9-3; 41-17D9-4; 41-17D9-5; "41-17D9-11""). In
the Lavon area this period is represented in eleven sites, ("4118C9-1""; "41-18C9-2""; 41-18C9-4; 41-18C9-6; "41-18D7-1";
"41-18D7-2""; 41-18D7-7; "41-18D7-8""; "41-18D7-9""; "4118D4-1""; and "41-18D4-4). Another (41-18D4-2") is probably an artificial mound but its cultural affiliation is unknown. Relatively large villages (as indicated above by
quotation marks) were found in both areas as well as smaller
temporary campsites. There is no indication of a cultural
difference between the small, campsites and the large village
sites within each reservoir area. Perhaps the small campsites were even occupied seasonally by the same people who
lived most of the year in the villages.
There seems to be a rather high degree of cultural similarity between the sites of the two reservoir areas at this
period, yet there are some significant differences. In the
Lavon area the villages are all located within the river
flood plain. They are 3-4 acres in extent. Houses, were
(probably) circular, 10 feet to 15 feet in diameter, with a centrally located fire hearth of clay and were made of wattle and
daub construction. Burials were within the village but apparently outside the houses; were flexed, unoriented and
without burial furniture (with one exception). Interments
were both single and multiple. Each major village contained
a large earthen pit with an encircling embankment. The
purpose of this pit is unknown but probably was some sort
of community center. Pottery was used but apparently not
made by these people, as it was not abundant and individual vessels were valuable enough to be mended and re-used
after having been broken. A wide variety of pottery types
were used. Clay tempered wares of Frankston Focus and
Titus Focus types were most common. Plain, shell tempered wares similar to the Henrietta Focus type, Nocona

Survey o~ Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

55

Plain, was of secondary importance. Limestone tempered
pottery (some with basketry-impressed vessel bottom) was
used but rarely. The bison does not seem to have been hunted
for food but deer and small animals were. Fish, mussels and
snails were apparently eaten. Agriqulture was practiced.
NIanos and metates were used with both back-and-forth motion and circular motion. Projectile point types were dominantly small arrow points and in order of importance were
Alba Barbed, Gary Stemmed, ’Trinity Stemmed, Ellis
Stemmed, Perdiz Pointed Stemmed, and triangular and triangular side-notched types. Many types of scraping tools
were used including small flakes of flint with one or more"
edges retouched; small, well made, snub-nose scrapers; and
reworked projectile points. Abraders were made of smal!
blocks of coarse sandstone. Ornaments of non-perishable"
materials, such as stone, bone and shell, were used but not
aboundantly. Red ocher pigment was commonly used. Small,
triangular, polished celts, boatstones, perhaps small stone
bowls, and gaming stones were also used. Bone was abundantly used for making pins, awls, fishhooks, flakers, and
tools for preparing hides. Stone implements were apparently
chipped with both antler and bone flaking tools. The lack
of abundant pottery, re-use of broken vessels, and the wide
variety of pottery types used indicate an extreme, range of,
trade for these items by the people of the Lavon Reservoir,
or the procurement of wives (as potters) from distant areas.
In the Garza-Little Elm area the villages were located on
knolls above the river flood plain for the most part, although
some villages were found extending into the flood plain.
These villages were 3-4 acres in extent. Nothing is known
of the house types except that they were probably of wattleand-daub construction. Burials were within the villages and
both single and multiple interments were made. In none of
these villages was the large ceremonial pit used. Pottery
was used but" apparently not made by these people. The
same variety of types was used as was the case inthe Lavon
area. However, there were significant differences in percentages of these types. A variety here called vesicular, and
the shell tempered ware that is similar to Nocona Plain,

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

were most commonly used. Of secondary importance were
the clay tempered wares of Frankston and Titus Focus.
Limestone tempered ware was apparently not used here.
None of the wares in either area can be considered intrinsic.
The bison does not seem to have been hunted for food, but
deer, small animals, fish, mussels and snails were eaten.
Agriculture was practiced. Ma~os and metates were used
with both back-and-forth motion and circular motion. PrOjectile point types were very similar to those used in the
Lavon area but there were significant differences in percentages of types used. Dart point types were dominant and
in order of importance they were Trinity Stemmed, Alba
Barbed, Gary Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, triangular and Perdiz Pointed Stemmed types.,6 Other lithic artifacts used
were generally similar to those used by the people of-the
Lavon sites. No bone, shell, or antler artifacts have been
found in association with the Garza-Little Elm sites. The
people of this area apparently had as widespread contacts
with other cultures as did the people of the Lavon area.
The sites of this period in the two reservoir areas seem,
at this time, to represent two distinct and previously undescribed cultural units. The Lavon sites appear to be basically Caddoan but distinct from any known group of the
Caddo. Their culture extends from the upper reaches of
the East Fork of the Trinity River, including the tributary
streams, to the confluence of the East Fork and the main
Trinity River. Pottery and other artifact types indicate that
this culture is coeval with Frankston, Titus and Henrietta
Foci and may be roughly dated between 1500 A. D. and
46 ProJecti}e point types used throughout this report are types established
¯ by either Dr. J. Chas. Kelley .or Mr_:. Alex D. Krieger and in use gen.erally by
¯ the members of the Anthropoiog~ Dept., University of Texas. The tangle exeel~tlon is the type Trinity Stemmed~ a tentative type established by the
~uclter.
PLATE 11
A. Typical undecorated potsherds from both Lavon and Garza-Little
Elm Reservoirs. 1-5 plain clay tempered sherds; 6-10 vesicular sherds from
Garza-Little Elm; 11-14 plain shell tempered sherds; 15 sherd of l~ocona.
Plain ware from Clay County included for comparison.
B. Incised pottery bottle from Farmersville Site, Lavon Reservoir.
(R. :K. Harris collactiOno)
Legend for Plate 12, Ayala Site

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Lit~Ie Elm Reservoirs

59

1650 A. D.4~ The writer and the members of the Dallas
Archaeological Society have agreed on a tentative name of
Wylie Focus for this culture. When the excavation recommended as a result of the present survey has been completed
it should be possible to fully describe and define this focus
and to establish its relation to other neighboring loci.
The pottery-bearing sites in the Garza-Little Elm area,
as has been shown, are similar in many respects to those of
the tentatively identified Wylie Focus, and certainly are
coeval with them, i. e. 1500 A. D. to 1650 A. D. Too little,
however, is known about these sites at present to attempt
to place them in their proper cultural position. On the basis
of the known similarities it may be reasonable to assume
that this group of sites represents a separate component of
the Wylie Focus. However, the differences that were shown
between the sites in the two areas are differences of kind,
as well as of degree, and seem significant enough in their
aggregate to imply a separate focus. If this is so and a separate focus is represented here, it may be more closely related to the Henrietta Focus to the west than it is to the
Caddoan groups to the east. The present survey has only
served to present and outline the problems here involved.
The future excavation that has been recommended should
provide the necessary information to place these sites in
their proper perspective.
47 Krleger, A. D.o 1946, I~P.

REFERENCES
Bennett, Leonard D.
1936. Interesting Artifacts of Clay County, Texas, Bulletin
of T.A.P.S., Vol. 8, pp. 87-93.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931. Physiography of ~he Western United States. New
York and London.
Ford, ,~. A.
1936. Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

6O

Louisiana and Mississippi. Anthro. Study No. 2, Dept.
of Conservation, La. Geological Survey.
Ford, J. A. and Gordon Willey
1940. Crooks Site, A MarksvilIe Period Burial Mound ~n
La Salle Parish, La. Anthro Study No. 3, Dept. of
Conservation, La. Geological Survey.

Harris,

R. K.

1936. Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity River Drainage, Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 8, pp. 113-133.
1939. A Net Sinker Site in Denton County. The Record of
the D.A.S., V(~I. 1, No. 2, pp. 8-10.
1945. A Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas.
Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 16, pp. 84-90.
1947. An Infant Burial. The Record of D.A.S., Vol. 6, No.
4, pp. 18-19.
1948. A Pottery Site Near Farmersville. The Record of the
D.A.S., Vol. 6, No. I0, pp. 38-45.
Housewright, Rex, et al.
1947. The Butler Hole House Site. The Record of the
D.A.S., Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 8-16.
Kelley, J. C.
N. D. Excavation and Interpretation of 5 Central Texas
Archaeological Sites, Manuscript, University of
Texas.
1947. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position
of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
XIII, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
Kirkland, Forrest
1942. A Series of Non-Pottery Sites in Dallas County,
Texas. The Record of the D.A.S., VoI. 3, No. 6, pp.
32-38.

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

61

Krieger, A. D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. The University of Texas, Publication No. 4640.
1947. Artifacts ]rom the PIainvisw Bison Bed. Bulletin of
the Geological Society of America, Vol. 58, pp. 938954.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The Archaeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma; A
Preliminary Report. American Antiquity, Vol. XI,
No. 4, pp. 228-256.
Patterson, J. T.
1936. The Corner Tang Flin~ Artifacts o$ Texas, The UniVersity of Texas Bulletin No. 3618.
Raiz, Erwin
1939. Map o~ the Landforms of the United States, Wallace
Atwood, Ginn & Co.
Stephenson, R. L.
1947. Archaeological Survey o~ Whitney Basin. Bulletin
of T.A.P.S., Vol. 18, pp. 129-142.
1948. Archaeological Survey o~ McGee Bend Reservoir.
Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 19, pp. 58-73.
1949~ A Note on Some Large Pits in Certain Sites Near
Dallas, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. XV, No. 1.
Watt, F. J.
1938. The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archaeologist No.
4, pp. 21-71.
Webb, Clarence H.
1940. House Types Among the Caddo Indians. Bulletin of
T.A.P.S., VoI. 12, pp. 48-75.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1942. Archaeological Remains in Central Kansas and Their

62

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

Possible Bearing on the Location o~ Quivira. Smithsonian Misc. Collections, 101, No. 7.
Wilson, Lester L.
1946. Problematical Pits on East Fork. The Record of the
D.A.S., Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 11-12.
Witte, A. H.
1936. Kitchen Middens o] the Upper Red River Drainage.
Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 8, pp. 71-86.
Wright, George T.
1940. T~iangular Points o5 Red River County. Bulletin of
T.A.P.S., Vol. 12, pp~ 169-174.

NOTES ON THE AYALA SITE, LOWER RIO
GRANDE VALLEY, TEXAS
T. N. CA1VIPBELL AND JACK Q. FRIZZELL

Introduction
In the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.and Tamaulipas
two archaeological cultures have thus far been recognized.
Knowledge of these cultures is based primarily on reconnaissance, for no real excavation has as yet been attempted.
The first and best known of these two cultures is the
Brownsville, which is largely coastal in its distribution and
is characterized by an abundance of artifacts made of shell.
This was first recognized by Anderson,, who in 1932 pub" lished a brief paper which listed the most common kinds
of artifacts but gave no name to the culture. In 1935 Sayles~
referred to this culture as the Brownsville Phase, naming it
after the city of Brownsville. Sayles showed its distribution
on the Texas side of the Rio Grande (roughly the delta
region), supplied a trait list, and indicated that it belonged
to a relatively late time period. In 1947 MacNeish3 presented
the main outlines of this same culture, referring to it as the
Brownsville complex. He mapped its full distribution (a
strip along the Gulf coast between the Arroyo Colorado in
southern Texas and the San Fernando River in northern
Tamaulipas), and he also cited evidence to show that it
began at some unknown date after 1,000 A. D. and survived
into the historic period.
The second culture, which has an inland distribution, is
less clearly defined and several different names have been
applied to it. As now known, it is characterized primarily
by stone artifacts. This culture was first recognized in 1935
by Sayles," who called it the Coahuiltecan Phase. He showed
1 Anderson, 1932.
2 Sayles, 1935, p. 40; Plate X, d, e, f, p. 42; Table 5, p. 102; Table 9, p.
3 MacNeish, 1947, pp. 2, 5-8, 10.
110; p. 117; Table 13, p, 124; M~ C, p. 132.
4. Sayles, 1935, p. 41; Table 5, p. 102; Table 9, p. 110; p. 117; Table 13.
124; ~.ap C, p. 132.

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

its distribution in Texas only (a long strip north of the
Rio Grande extending from Eagle Pass to Hidalgo), and his
tables suggested a comparatively late date for the culture.
As a result of extensive reconnaissance in Tamaulipas, Mac°
Neish~ in 1947 described two related inland culture complexes, the Repelo and the Abasolo, which appear to be
closely related to Sayles’ Coahuiltecan Phase. According to
MacNeish, the Repelo complex is the earlier (about 500 to
1,000 A. D.) and is largely confined to the inland area lying
between the Rio de las Palmas and San Fernando rivers
in Tamaulipas. The Abasolo complex is later (about 800
A. D. to historic times) and occupies the inland area extending from the Rio de las Palmas of Tamaulipas northward across the Rio Grande into southern Texas. Of these
two inland complexes described by MacNeish, the Abasolo
appears to be virtually the same as the Coahuiltecan Phase
of Sayles. Hughes6 has reported archaeological materials
from northern Tamaulipas which evidently belonged to
MacNeish’s Repelo and Abasolo complexes. In his paper on
the Clear Fork Focus, Kelley7 used the term Monte Aspect,
which apparently includes Sayles’ Coahuiltecan Phase as
well as the Repelo and Abasolo complexes of MacNeish. It
is hoped that this varied terminology will soon be systematized. We prefer to use Kelley’s broad term, Monte, until
local subdivisions in the lower Rio Grande Valley have been
clearly distinguished on the basis of excavation.
Recent discoveries at the Ayala sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley have provided specific information on
Brownsville burial customs and physical type. Stratigraphic
evidence at this site also indicates a Monte (CoahuiltecanAbasolo) occupation fo!lowed by a Brownsville occupation.
The Ayala site is approximately 50 miles above the mouth
of the Rio Grande.
5 :~Iaet~eish, 1947, pp. 1-3, 10.
6 Hughes, 1947. Mullerried (1934, pp. 217-219) has also described a small
collection from northern Tamaulipas which seems to belong to the same
basic culture.
7 Ke!ley, 1947, p. 104 (footnote 26).
8 In the files at the University of Texas this site is designated as 79D5-1.

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas

65

Discovery and Investigation oS the Ayala Site
In the summer of 1948, lYlr. M. E. Ayala of McAllen (Hidalgo County) built a house on his farm 1.5 miles south of
that city. This house faces east on South Depot Road. A
sewer trench was dug from the rear of the house westward
toward a low bluff overlooking a former channel of the
Rio Grande, and during the course of excavation workmen
encountered a series of burials at depths ranging from 2
to 6 feet. The bones were removed from the trench by the
workmen as they were encountered and were placed in small
piles along the trench. The initial discovery was made on
July 2.
A newspaper story covering the first three burials was
published by the McAllen Valley Evening Monitor in its
issue of July 8. On July 9, Mr. Paul T. Vickexs, manager of
the McAllen Chamber of Commerce, wrote to the Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, describing the
finds and enclosing a clipping of the newspaper story.
Frizzell, whose home is in the nearby town of Weslaco, was
asked to investigate the Ayala burial locality. On July 17,
Frizzell visited the Ayala farm and found that five additional burials had been removed between July 9 and 14. He
collected all the available information on these burials, drew
a sketch map and a profile, took photographs, and returned
to Austin with a portion of the badly damaged skeletal material and most of the artifacts collected from the burial area.
On July 23 and 24, three more burials were found, making
a total of eleven. The skeletal materials and associated artifacts from these last three burials were sent to the University of Texas by lVlr. Charles A. Fink of the lYlcAllen Valley
Evening Monitor.~
The Ayala Site and Its Archaeological Materials
The Ayala site has a distinctive physiographic location.
It lies on high ground which rises about 15 feet above a
9 We are much indebted to Messrs. Ayala, VIckers, and FInk for their
cooperation, and we are especially grateful to ]M~r. Fink for his generous
e.ffor.ts in. our. .behalf. Mr. Lewis Carver of the l~cAllen Valley Evening
h~onitor also ~mdly supplied data on other burials previously found In the
vicinity of McAllen.

66

Texas A~cheological and Paleontologica! Society

former channel of the Rio Grande. This old channel has a
width of approximately 2,500 feet at the Ayala locality, and
it is now used as a floodway. According to Mr. Ayala, the
records show that the Rio Grande occupied this channel
in the latter part of the eighteenth century, when the area
was first settled by Europeans. Today the Rio Grande is
six miles south of the Ayala site. The site is now sparsely
covered by large mesquite trees, and there is no record of
its ever having been under cultivation.
The sewer trench, which extended from the newly con°
structed house to the low bluff overlooking the old river
channel, was 2.5 feet wide, 7 feet deep, and approximately
180 feet long. In the vertical walls of this trench two alluvial layers could be distinguished. At the top was a layer
of light silt 4 feet thick, and below it was a layer of darker
silt which continued downward to the bottom of the trench.
In Plate 12a, the approximate vertical distribution of the
burials is shown. This profile is based on the measurements
and observations of both Frizzell and Fink. It should be
made clear that in some cases the burials had already been
removed before the stratigraphic data were collected. Some
of the burials were entirely in the upper layer (Burials 1
and 2), some were entirely in the lower layer (Burials 7, 8,
9 and 10), and the remainder lay near the division between
the two soil layers (Burials 3, 4, 5, and 6). The position of
Burial 11 could not be obtained. In Burials 5, 6, 7, and 8,
portions of which still remained in the walls of the trench,
Frizzell noted darker soil surrounding the bones; but the
outlines of the original burial pits could not be traced. It
would appear that most .of these burials were made during
the period when the upper laydr of silt was being deposited.
Except for Burial 10, which was a group burial, all of the
Ayala site burials were single burials. The available information on the orientation and position of the skeletons in
these burials is not very satisfactory, but all accounts indicate flexed burials. The reports also indicate that in several
burials the forearms were crossed, and in one burial it is

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Gra~te Valley, Texa~

67

PROFILE SHOWING VERTIC~... DLSTRISUTION OF B~JRIALS
AT THI~ AYALA SITE

A

F

G

H

0

P

PLATE

12

A~-,’tla Site, Lower ]Rio GrRndo Valley, Texas. A, profile showing vertical
distribution of burials; B-C, F-I, L-~M, bone beads; D, O]lva bead; E, rroJectile point; J-K, nonch s~ll beads; N-O, flint gouges; P. knife.

~68

Texas Archeolog~ca~ and Paleontological Society

stated that the hands were adjacent to the face. The skull
and some long bones of Burial 1 show traces of red ochre.
The skeletal material is badly damaged because of the
manner in which it was removed from the earth. Burials 5,
6, 7, and 9 are not represented by any skeletal material. Five
skulls have been partially restored, so that some information
: en sex and age is available. The individuals in Burials 1 and
2 were adult males. Those in Burials 3 and 4 were adults, but
the bones are too fragmentary for sexing. Burial 8 was that
of an adult female; and Burial 10, the group burial, seems
to have contained two adults, one of which is a female, and
three children. Burial 11 was that of an infant. The total
number of individuals in the eleven burials was fifteen.
These burials present some evidences of death by violence.
The skull of the adult female in Burial 8 appears to have
received a strong blow on the right side of the frontal bone
adjacent to the coronal suture. One of the adults in Burial
t0 probably died from a dart wound, for the distal fragment
of a small dart point is embedded in the right side of the
centrum of one of the lumbar vertebrae. The dart point entered the centrum near its lower border and penetrated
it in an upward oblique direction.
The badly fragmented cranial material from the Ayala
site has been reconstructed to the maximum extent possible.
Two female calvaria are complete enough for preliminary
measurements,~o which indicate a dolichocranic or longheaded population. The female from Burial 8 has a cranial
index of 74.7, and the female from Burial 10 has a cranial
index of 73.
The artifacts definitely associated with the burials are
all ornaments. Encircling the neck vertebrae of the female
in Burial 8 were 94 beads which formed a necklace. This
necklace included 60 Oliva shells ,, with spire tips removed
10 The skeletal material from the Ayala site will e~2entually be sent to
a physical anthropologist for further study.
11 Fourteen of these OHva beads (Oliva sayana Ravened are now at the
University of Texas. The smallest has a length of 47.~ ram., the longest
a length of 60 ram. Thlrty-eight Ol|va beads were kept by /Cir. A.yala, and
the remainder were taken by an unidentified collector in McAllen.

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande V~rlley, Texas

69

(Plate 12, d) ; two disk-shaped beads (Plate 12, j) made from
conch columella, each with a diameter of 18 ram. and a
thickness of 4 mm.; and 32 tubular bone beads. The shortest
bone bead has a length of 5 mm. and a maximum diameter
of 6 mm.; the longest a length of 16 mm. and a maximum
diameter of 6 mm. Five of the bone beads have encircling
grooves--three with one groove (Plate 12 c and h) and two
with two grooves (Plate 12, i). The remainder of the bone
beads are undecorated (Plate 12, f, g, l, m).
With one of the infants in Burial 10 was a necklace composed of very small tubular bone beads. Sixteen of these
tiny beads were recovered. The shortest has a length of 4
.ram. and a maximum diameter of 2.5 mm.; the longest a
length of 12 ram. and a maximum diameter of 6 ram. Encircling the neck vertebrae of one of the adults in this same
burial was another necklace, this one composed of alterhating shell and bone beads. Seventeen beads from this
necklace are in the University of Texas collection. Ten of
these are disk-shaped conch shell beads (Plate 12, k) of approxLmately the same size (diameter 17 mm., thickness
3.5 mm.). The remaining seven are tubular bone beads;
they are also of approximately the same size (length 16 ram.,
maximum diameter 12 ram.) and have notched ends (Plate
12, b)
It is clear that the Ayala burials were placed in a midden
deposit. This is indicated by the materials from the soil
surrounding the burials. These materials include flint flakes
and artifacts, baked clay fragments, snail and bivalve shells,
and animal bones.
Near Burial 5, but seemingly not associated with it, was
12 Burials similar to those at the Ayala site have been reported from the
same vicinity near :McAllen (Yr. Lewis Carver, letter, October 8, 1948).
In October, 19~8, ~r. Jason Matthews uncovered two burials near his residence on South 10th Street, which is about two miles east of the Ayala
site. These burials came from a depth of approximately six feet below the
surface; the skeletons were in a flexed 2position and associated with them
were beads and "bone o~naments.’" At about the same time l~fr. ~Valter Hart
excavated "four or five" burials from an east-west ridge on his farm Just
~outh of ]E[cAllen. Two are described as flexed burials, but information on
the position of the remainder is lacking. A projectile point was embedded
in one of the skulls.

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

a large flint gouge of Clear Fork t3rpe’~ (Plate 12, n). This
specimen has a length of 62 mm., a width of 38 ram., and a
thickness of 18 mm. It is chipped on both faces. Near Burial
8.was a very small gouge or scraper (Plate 12, o) which is
triangular in outline and chipped on both faces. It has a
length of 22 mm., a width of 22 mm., and a thickness of 7
nun. Likewise near Burial 8 was one complete dart point
(Plate 12, e) and also one distal fragment of a dart point.
An asymmetrically triangular knife was also found near one
unidentified burial (Plate 12, p). Fifteen flint flakes were
also collected from the soil surroundLng the various burials.
The faunal material includes deer (Odocoileus), coyote
(Canis latrans), pocket gopher (genus unidentifiable, but
probably Geornys14), and snake (genus unidentified). One
marine shell is represented in the midden, the transverse
arc shell (Arca transverse Say). Reference has already been
made to ornaments made from two marine shells, Ol~va and
conch. The snail shells, as yet unidentified, are all land
sn~ls of the same species.Is
Interpretation
Two conclusions have been drawn from the evidence
presented above. First, the midden in which the burials
were placed can be identified with the Monte (Coahuiltecan-Abasolo) culture; second, because of the associated ornaments, two of the burials (Burials 8 and 10), and probably
all of them, can be attributed to the Brownsville culture.
None of the flint artifacts from the midden, except possibly the small gouge or scraper (Plate 12, o) can be attributed to the Brownsville culture. Sayles has listed the
small gouge or "core scraper",o as occurring in his Brownsville Phase, but Anderson and MacNeish do not mention
this type for the Brownsville. On the other hand, the large
Clear Fork gouge is an important artifact type in Sayles’
13 RRy, 1938, pp. 197-198.
14 Davis, 1940, pp. 7, 23-31. Gsornys personatus occurs in this are~ ~Ry.
See ~so Campbell, 1948, p. 179.
15 ~sistance Jn identl~ ~e faunal material w~ given by Mr. Glen
~ Evans; ~sist~t Dlr~tor of ~e Te~ ~emorl~ Museum, Austin.
16 Sayles, 1935, T~le 6, P. 102.

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texaz

71

Coahuiltecan Phase,,7 and Hughes,, illustrates what appears
to be one of these from northern Tamaulipas (MacNeish’s
Repelo-Abasolo area). Insofar as it is possible to tell from
published accounts, the dart point (Plate 12, e) and the
knife (Plate 12, p) are much more likely to belong to the
Monte than to the Brownsville culture.
The beads associated with the burials are characteristic
Brownsville ornaments. MacNeish reports that Brownsville
burials "are predominantly flexed, and about half the time
are without burial furniture. When burial furniture does
occur, it usually consists of beads, pendants, and Huasteca
pottery.",~ But Abasolo burials, according to MacNeish,
are "semi-flexed, in shallow pits and without burial furniture."~o Sayles reports Coahuiltecan Phase burials as "partially cremated .... covered with large stones,"2~ and he
makes no mention of burial furniture. We thus seem to be
reasonably safe in assigning the Ayala burials to the
Brownsville culture.
In summary it may be stated that the Ayala site consists
of a Monte (Coahuiltecan-Abasolo) midden into which
Brownsville culture burials were intruded. The evidence
supports MacNeish’s statement that in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley some sites show Brownsville materials overlying Abasolo materials.~2 However, it should be pointed
out that the present scanty information from the Ayala site
needs to be confirmed by controlled excavation. Preliminary measurements of skulls from the Ayala site indicate
that the Brownsville population was long-headed.
Bibliography
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande delta region. Bulletin
the Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
17 Idem.
18 Hughes, 1947, :Plate 5, p.
19 ]~facNetsh, 1947, pp, 6-7. Mason (1935, pp. 34, 37) mentions Brownsville
burials which contain Hua~teca pottery and shell beads,
20 1Pfacl~eish, 1947, D. 2.
21 Sayles, 1935, Table 5, p. 102.
22 ~acNeish, 1947, p. 7.

72

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

Campbell, T. N.
1948. The pocket gopher at the Johnson site: a correction.
Bulletin ol the Texas Archeological and Pateontoloffical Society, Vol. 19, p. 179.
Davis, William R.
1940. Distribution and variation of pocket gophers (Genus
Geomys) in the southwestern United States. Texa~
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin No. 490.
Hughes, Jack T.
1947. An archaeological reconnaissance in Tamaulipas,
Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 3339.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The cultural affi~ations and chronological position
of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity, Volo
13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947. A preliminary report on coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-15.
Mason, J. Alden
1935. The place of Texas in pre-Columbian relationships
between the United States and Mexico. Bulletin o~
t.he Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
Mullerried, Federico I~ G.
1934. Sobre artefactos de piedra en la porcion oriental del
estado de Coahuila. Anales det Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia, y Etnogra~ia, Quinta Epoca,
Tomo I, pp. 205-219. Mexico.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938. The Clear Fork culture complex. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological. Society~
Vol. 10, pp. 193-207.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An archaeological survey of Texas. Medallion Pa-.
pets, No. 17, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
September, 1948

A TENTATIVE CULTURAL SEQUENCE FOR
THE AREA ABOUT THE MOUTH
OF THE PECOS’
HERBERT C. TAYLOR, JR.

This paper is cdncerned with the archaelogy of the area
about the confluence of the Pecos River and Rio Grande.
The region is cut by deep arroyos, in the walls of which are
found the rock shelters which comprised the homes of the
pre-historic Pecos River cave dwellers. Within a radius of
thirty miles of the Pecos River mouth is found a distinctive
type of pictograph, from whence is derived the appellation,
"Pecos River Focus pictograph area.’’z
Objectives of this article are: first, the location and synthesis of all reported sites in the area; and second, the presentation of a tentative cultural sequence.
On the map (Plate 13) an attempt has been made to locate
all sites so far reported.
Because several institutions
and individuals have conducted archaeological investigations in the area, sites have frequently been reported under
different names or numbers in various publications. Many
have been located only in a cursory or tentative manner.
On the map (Plate 13) an attempt has been made to locate
all sites so far reported, and doubtless other sites have yet
to be located. Hearsay reports of sites are not included.
I Condensed from portions of a thesis to be presented to the Faculty of
the graduate School of the University of Texas in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Arts. So much of this tentative
construction springs from suggestions by Dr. J. Charles Kelley that the work
must be regarded as largely his. Pie should not be, however, pilloried for errors herein; the responsibility of this presentation is the writer’s.
In addition to Dr. Kelley, the writer is indebted to :Dr. T. N. Campbell,
Dr. J. Gilbert McAlllster and Mr. A. D. Krleger of the University of Texas
Department of Anthropology, and to Mr. A. T. Jackson, formerly field
archaeologist for the University, for suggestions and criticisms. In the field],
]:)on Valeriano Diego, Mr. Guy Skiles, and Mr. E. M. Zuberbueler have the
thanks of the writer for not only giving permission to enter their land but
for providing ever~ assistance to him.
Thanks are also due for assistance in the field to l~r. A. D. Peterson of
Pennsylvania State College, and Senores Ramon and Raul Diego-Rlza.
The field work was financed by my parents, Mr. and Mrs. H. C. Taylor
of I-louston, Texas. Much of the research Was done by my wife, Mrs. Ruby
Taylor, Assistant Curator of the Anthropolog’~r Museum, Uni_ver~,ity
~. For a delineation and description of the area see "x’aylor,
chaeologlcal Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila,’" Texas Archaeclogica!
and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 19, Ahilene, 1948.

74

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

PLATE 18

The following chart shows which sites in this area have
been investigated by workers in the field. The site number given in the left hand column is that marked on the
map in this article; the quadrangular number .gives the
site number found on the master site map of the University of Texas, employing a system recommended by the
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society. Under
the column marked "Jackson’s PWTI"3 the site number is
t~iat given in A. T. Jackson’s Picture Writing o[ Texas Indians; the next two columns contain the numbers or names
employed elsewhere by Jackson and by the writer in notes
And publications. Finally, the primary source for the location and description of the site is given. Only the article
containing the original description or most exact location
is employed; later references are omitted. Since in some
"instances the same site has been reported in different locations, the identification and site number are based upon
personal examination.
~ In the chart certain abbreviations have been employed: PWTI- Picture
Writing of Texas Indlan~ by Jackson; Al~NO--"Archaeologlcal l~econnais~ance in ~o~he~ CoahuH~" by Taylor; ~BB~Blg Bend Basket Maker
Paper; TAP~Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin:

A Tentative Cultural Sequence :for Lower Pecos Area

75

Correlation of Site Numbering Systems
Site
No.

Quadranguo
lar System
No,

pS~o!
Notes
Jack- I No.
or
Jackson’s. INoteSNameNo.Tayl°r’Sor

I Coah.
t Coah.
3

I

5
6
7

Cbah.
Coah.
Coah.

Loc~
Name

Sources

La Elephante
San
Martin

ARNC

Angellta i ARNC

I Coah.
, Coah.
I Coah. 8

’ ’

I ARNC
’ tAPaqc

Coah.

9
10

Coah 10

Cave
60B9-1

12

60B8 -1

13

60B8-3

14

60B8-4

91

15
16

60B8-2
60B8-5

90

Painted
Canyon B
Painted
Canyon A

17

60B8-6

88

Presa
Canyon A

96

I-Iorseshoe
Cave
92

Presa

18
19

60B5-1
60B8-7

89

Canyon

20
21
22
23

60B8-8
60B8-10
60B8-11
60B5-2

84
87

No. S
No. 7 & 8

82

1 &

24

60B5-3

25

60B5-4

26

60B8-9

27

60B7-I
71
72

~ Cave
Parlda

60B4-4

60B4-8
60B4-3

PWTI
PWTI
PWTI
!
PWTI
Fate Bell Pearce & Jackson
U.T. publication
Shelter

Jackson, FN
Taylor, FN ’48
P%VTI

60B4-2

60B4-7

Panther I Panther
Cave
Cave

Cave

60B4-1

60B4-6

I PWTI

B

PWTI

29

32

PWTI
Kelley, FN ’48
PWTI

guberbueler

28

60B4-~

Z Canyon
Shelter
Z Canyon i Painted
Gallery
Rocks

Woolsey, UT Notes
’35, Butler,
Thesis
PWTI
PWTI, Kelley, FN
’48, Taylor,
FN ’48

PWTI

Painted
~ Cave

31’

,
PWTI

11

Painted
Cave
Parida

Cave
Goat
,Cave

.~vgoore’
head
Cave
80

~

PWTI

PWTI
PWTI
: P~VTI

,, 70
69

I PWTI

PWTI

Palnte~
Cave

PWTI
PWTI

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

CORRELATION OF SITE NUMBERING SYSTEMS (Continued)
Site

36

38
39

Quadrangular System
No.

60B4-10
60B4-9
60B4-11
60B4-~2

Jackson’s
PWTI
No.

I Jackson’s
|Notes
[No. or
rName

Shumla 1

78

I-D~lden~ trAPS ’37

Shumla
Caves

BBBMP I
BBBMP

Shumla 3
Shumla 4
Kelley
Cave

605~6-2
60A6-3

60A6=6

Sources

PWTI

Shumls
Caves

76

BBBMP I

Kelley

FN

’32

I Taylor

FN

’47

T~ylor ~N

Langtry
Rock
Midden
Eagle
Cave

I

Taylor FN "47

"~kiles
Cave

60A6-5

46

Local
Name

74

60A6-4
45

Name

Murrah
Cave

60:B4-13
60B4-14
42

Taylor’s
Notes
No. or

Taylor FN ’48
Eagle
Cave

BBBMP IE[.PWTI

Sites
Rattle47

60A5-1

73

snake

PWTI

Canyon

60A5-2

A few words of warning might be set down here concerning the use of the map; sites here numbered 42, 43, and 44
all lie upon Mile Canyon although spatial limitations prevented their being so depicted. Site number 10 is only nominally a pictograph site; the cave wall has collapsed and one
bit of painted limestone was found in the debris.
There are several types of sites in the area, the most
common being rock shelters containing evidences of human
occupation in the form of middens, or refuse heaps on the
cave floor.
In one instance, site number 16, hearths were found along
a canyon rim without other evidences of occupation. A few
sites, numbers 9, 45, and 48, are composed of piles of burnt
rock. Several names have been applied to this type of site:
"burnt rock mounds" of Texas, sotol pits, etc. Perhaps a better system of nomenclature would be to employ the term
burnt rock middens, since these piles were obviously incidental accumulations and not deliberately constructed

A Tentative Cultural Sequence ]or Lower Pecos Area

77

mounds., In contrast to the rock shelters the burnt rock
middens seem to be virtually artifact sterile.
Pictographs occur in two types of sites, on the walls of
occupied rock shelters and in gallery-like form on cliff-sides
and stream cutbacks. Sites 1, 2, 3, and 15 are examples
of this latter type.
Archaeological investigation of the pictographs of western
Texas had its inception only recently. In his classic pictographic study Garrick Mallery devotes only a few lines to
Texas paintings,s Colonel M. L. Crimmins6 and Professor
Victor J. Smith7 were pioneers in locating and describing
pictographs in the area and in 1938 A. T. Jackson published
his exhaustive Picture Writing el Texas Indians.o
Mr. and Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, in a series of publications
in the late thirties, set up a classificatory system for these
paintings,s It was in the course of this study that the Kirklands noted a distinctive type of pictograph peculiar to the
area immediately about the confluence of the Pecos and the
Rio Grande. (See Plate 14).
These paintings are distinguishable from those which occur elsewhere in West Texas by several criteria:
1) They are polychromatic.
2) The atlatl, but never the bow, is depicted in them.
3) They show evidence of greater age than other types
of pictographs in the area; frquently other types of paintings are found superimposed upon them.
4) There seems to be group composition in the paintings.
4 l~rieger, A. D., "Some Suggestions on Archaeological Terms," Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 16, 1945, pp. 41-46.
5 Mallery, Garrick, 4th and 5th Annual Reports of the Bureau of American Ethnology.
6 Crlmmins, Colonel i~I. L., "The Pictographs at Hueco Tanks," Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 3, Abilene, :1931.
7 Smith, ~’ictor J., "Indian l~ictographs of the Big Bend in Texas."
Publications of the Texas Folklore Society, No. II, Austin, 1923. Smith,
Ytetor J,, "The Human I-Iand in l~rimitive ~rt," Publications of the Texas
Folklore Society, :No. IV, Jkustin, 1925.
8 3~ckson, .&. T., Picture Writing of Texas Indians, University of Texas
Publications, :No. 3809.
9 I~irkland, Forrest, articles in Texas A~chaeologlcsl and Paleontological
Society Bulletins~ Vols. 9, 10, and 11. (See bibliography).

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

78

5) The figures are highly conventionalized.
In actuality, there seem to be three discrete types of
paintings in the area.1°
1)

The previously discussed Pecos Focus paintings.

2) Crude realistic representations of men and animals
done in red or black. This type depicts the bow and is sometimes found superimposed upon the Pecos Focus pictographs.
3)

(Plate 15).

Linear representations of men depicting firearms,

horses and a U. S. Army officer dressed in a uniform of the
latter part of the nineteenth century.
Thus, we have in the region a sort of pictographic stratigraphy. The third type must be, inferentially, Apache, since
they are known to have occupied the area in the nineteenth
century and similar types of paintings are found among the
Navajo. The second type seems to be late pre-historic and
is found widely throughout West Texas. On the other hand,
the first type seems to be early, and, as has been pointed
out, is peculiar to the area under discussion. In an effort
to explain the presence of a complex type of early pictograph in such a restricted locality, it will be necessary to
consider, briefly, the development of concepts concerning
the pre-historic cultural sequence in western Texas.
When the first reports of an early hunting and gathering
horizon in western Texas were made the culture was
identified as an off-shoot of the Basket Maker and thus
gained the alliterative title of Big Bend Basket Maker.,,
The culture was assigned no place in relative chronology,
save that it was prehistoric. Its material remains consisted
mainly of flint dart points, arrowheads, other flint artifacts,
sandals, matting, coiled basketry, netting and pictographs.
]0 Mr. Forrest l~Irkland described only the first two types; the paintings in Press Canyon, described herein, would seem to be a third.
11 Smith, Victor J., "Archaeological !~Totes of the Big Bend l~eglon of
Texas," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Abtiene,
1931, p. 69.

A Tentative Cultural Sequence for Lower Pecos Area

81

This conglomerate of cultural bag and baggage was held
to prove its affinity to the Basket Maker of New 1Vfexico.
Soon the workers in the field challenged this concept.,~
They argued that a lithic, hunting tradition was basic to
the early pre-history of most of North America and that
the consequent similarity of cultural material did not prove
an immediate relationship to the Southwestern Basket
Makers.
E. B. Sayles tentatively identified three early food-gathering groups in West Texas: Hueco Cave Dweller in the E1
Paso region, Big Bend Cave Dweller, and Pecos River Cave
Dweller in the area about the mouth of the Pecos,,s
In 1940 Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer published the report of extensive archaeological field work and geologicalchronological correlations in the Big Bend.v, Briefly, this
paper identified three successive cultural horizons and for
the first time, gave relative chronology to the cultures.
The Pecos River Focus is the earliest of these cultures,
having come to an end before the beginning of the Kokernot
formation, giving it a possible terminal date of before 1000
A.D. Its diagnostic characteristics are the Langtry Stemmed
projectile point, retouched flint knives with a straight or
slightly curving edge, shell ornaments, non-split stitch coiled
basketry, round toed sandals, and painted pebbles. It was
pre-agricultural and pre-ceramic.
The Chisos Focus which follows the Pecos Focus, is characterized by distinctive projectile points such as the Paisano
12 Setzler, t~. :M[., "A. Prehistoric Cave Culture In Southwest Texas,"
American Anthropologist, Vol. 87, 1935.
Reed, :Ertk, Summary of ~ letter in ~n editorial note en~tled "~tg ~end
B~ket M~ers," El Palacio, Vol. XL~, S~t~ Fe, 1937.
ffudd, N. ~., "Progress In the ~uthw~t," Essays in Historical Anthropology of North America, Smtthsontan InstIudon, Washing~n, D.
1940, pp. 429-30.
1~ Sayles, E. B., An Archaeological Su~eM of Texas, Gil~ Pueblo, 1935.
14 Kelley, 3. Ch~les, T, N. Campbell ~d Donald 5. ~hmer, "The
socl~t!on of ~chaeologic~ MuterIa~ ~d Geologic~ Deposits In the Big
Bend Region of Texas," Sul Ross State Teachers College BulletIn, Vol.
~I, ~o. 3, September 1940.

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Indented Base,,s fish-tailed sandals, split stitch basketry and
agriculture.
The third cultural phase is that of the Livermore Focus,
which seems to have been contemporaneous with the Chisos
Focus but which probably was .ancestral to the Bravo Valley Aspect. This period is characterized by arrowpoints,
cluding side-notched points, the so-called Livermore point,
snub nose scrapers and flake knives.
The cultural sequence outlined above is the accepted one
for western Texas and has been considered to be applicable
to the area about the mouth of the Pecos.
¯ Originally, workers r_eporte~d that one culture only was
represented in the area. This concept, it is believed, was
mistaken and resulted from the excavational techniques employed. In the Witte Museum report on Shumla cave,e it is
stated that the assumption was that only one culture was
represented and thus no effortwas made to determine stratigraphy. Other workers employed the layer technique; this
resulted in cutting across stratigraphic lines with a consequent failure to see changes in the culture.
Artifacts found in these sites include diagnostic points of
the Pecos and Chisos foci as well as Livermore arrowheads.
There seems, however, to have been a difference between
the cultural sequence here and that in the Big Bend.
Analysis of Davenport’s,~7 Holden’s,e and Pearce and
Jackson’s1, reports, plus examination of an unpublished analysis of projectile point types by depth in Fate Bell Shelter
by Jacksonao and a test trench of site number 26 by A. D.
Peterson and the writer2, brought forth a distinction in the
cultural sequences in the two areas.
15 The writer regrets that, in a previous paper ("An Archaeological
l~econnaissance in Nortllern Coahulla~" Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, 1948) Dr. ~[£e]ley w~s misquoted as saylng that
Paiaano Indented Base is characteristic Rlso of the Pecos Focus.
16 OP. Cit~, Big Bend Basket MakeP Paper~ No. 1.
17 OP. tit., Davenport.
18 TIolden, W. C., "Excavation of Murrah Cave," Texas Archaeological
and Paleontoloflical Society Bulletin, Vol. IX, Abtlene, 1937.
19 Fearce and Jackson, University of Texas Bulletin No, 3327.
20 Jackson, A. T., Unpublished M. S., U. T. files.
21 Taylor, Field Notes, June 1948.

A Tentative Cultural Sequence for Lower Pecos Area

85

In the Big Bend, Pecos Focus sites cease to exist before
the deposition of the Kokernot formation; a few Chisos
Focus artifacts are intrusive in these sites but a fairly clear
line of demarcation is apparent between the loci. In the
area about the mouth of the Pecos, Langtry Stemmed points
are found at the bottom of the deposits, then working upward one finds variants upon this point type, and also, typical Chisos Focus points. The Langtry Stemmed projectile
points do not cease in the upper layers, but there are greater
numbers of Chisos type points. Livermore points have been
reported from a few sites in the area, and where figures
exist, they seem to have been found in the upper layer of
the forward mid-section of the midden.
It is now proposed, on the basis of the evidence given, to
present a tentative cultu._ral sequence for the area about the
mouth of the Pecos. It is admittedly conjectural, designed
to fit the facts that we have thus far discovered, in the
light of what is known concerning areas peripheral to it.
Let it be emphasized that this reconstruction is tentative, not
presented as a final or sweeping one, but it is felt that enough
field work has been done in the area, not only to justify but
to necessitate the beginnings of, interpretation.
Sometime before 1000 A. D. western Texas was occupied
by an hunting and gathering group which possessed the material culture which archaeology has designated Pecos River
Focus. During the dry period represented by the closing
phases of the Calamity formation, i. e., at about 1000 A. D.
or shortly after, this group largely abandoned the Big Bend
area and either moved to or remained in the area about the
confluence of the Pecos and Rio Grande.
The emphasis of this group presumably had been upon
hunting, but the archaeological evidence shows that in their
location about the mouth of the Pecos River, their chief subsistence was derived from river mussels and wild plant food.
This probably resulted from drought conditions then prevailing with a consequent decrease in the number of large
animals. The culture then had recourse to religious or magi-

86

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cal devices in an effort to produce game. A hunting cult developed, the proof of which is to be found in the paintings-conventionalized men carrying the implements of the chase,
atlatl and throwing stick, beneath these men the small
paintings of deer,, frequently with dart shafts sticking in
them; above these paintings frequently is depicted the puma,
menacing and very large in proportion to the men, enormous
in proportion to the deer. Possibly the painted pebbles found
in this region also reflect this hunting cult. Meanwhile,
in the Big Bend area, the Chisos Focus appeared and supplanted the Pecos River Focus culture, but at the mouth
of the Pecos the old culture still thrived. As a consequence
we find certain artifacts diagnostic of the Chisos Focus as
intrusives from the west, but the Pecos River Focus continued to be, until a relatively late period, the dominant culture. Agriculture and pottery-making were never, however, adopted in the lower Pecos River area, since this area
has been too arid.
For the later sedentary, agricultural peoples, the dry, barren country about the mouth of the Pecos was undesirable.
Probably in the immediate pre-historic period it was only
seasonally or sporadically occupied, the caves being used
as hunting stations or camping spots by peoples from the
west. Here we find the solution to the Livermore points
found in a few of the caves and probably during this period
were painted the second type of pictographs found in the
area, possibly by Jumano or a similar people.~2
During the historic period the Apache ranged across the
area driving out the more peaceful inhabitants, and left the
third type of pictograph found in the region.
In brief summary, the evidence seems to point to a longlived cultural continuum of the Pecos River Focus in the
area, later affected but not dominated by assimilation of the
material culture of the Chisos Focus. This culture seems to
have finally disappeared approximately coincident with the
appearance of an agricultural sedentary culture into the
22 Suggested as a l~ossibllity by Dr. J. Charles Kelley.

A Tentative Cultural Sequence ]or .Lower Pecos-Area

g,7

Big Bend area farther west. ,Following this the area was
traversed by wandering bands of hunters from West Texas
and later by the Apache.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Crimmins, Colonel M. L., "The Pictographs at Hueco
Tanks," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Vol. III, Abilene, 1931.
Davenport, J. W., ArchaeologicaI i~xploration of Eagle
Cave, Langtry, Texas. Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No.
4, Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio, 1938.
Holden, W. C., "Excavation of Murrah Cave," Texas Ar~
chaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, ~rol,: 9,
Abilene, 1937.
Jackson, A. T., Picture Writing of Texas Indians, Anthro:
pological Papers, Vol. II, University of Texas Publication,
1938.
.................................... , An analysis of Projectile Points .b~;
Depth, Fate Bell Shelter, (Incomplete). Unpublished M. S.
Judd, N. M., "Progress in the Southwest," Essays in Historical Anthropology of North A~nerica, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C., 1940.
Kelley, 3. Charles, M. S. to be published on pictographs of
region.
....................................... , T. N. Campbell and Donald J. Lehmer, "The Association of Archaeological Materials and Geological Depos,:ts in the Big Bend Region of Texas," Sul Ross
State Teachers College Bulletin, Vol. XXI, No. 3, September 1940.
Kirkland, Forrest, "A Comparison of Texas Indian Pictographs with Paleolithic Paintings in Europe." Central Texas
Archaeologist, No. 3.
, "A Study of Indian Pictures in
Texas," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Vol. 9, Abilene, 1937.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

................................... , "A Description of Texas Pictographs," Texas Archaeological and PaleontologicaI Society
Bulletin, Vol. 10, Abilene, 1938.
................................... , "Indian l~ictures in Dry Shelters of
Val Verde County," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 11, Abilene, 1939.
Martin, George C., "Archaeological Exploration of Shumla
Caves," Big Bend Basket Maker Papers, No. 3, Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio, 1933.
...................................... , Report on Four Shumla Cave Pockets, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 7, Abilene, 1935.
Krieger, A. D., "Some Suggestions on Archaeological
Terms," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Vol. 16, 1945, pp. 41-46.
Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson, A Prehistoric Rock Shelter
in Val Verde County, Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1,
No. 3, University of Texas Publications, 1933.
Reed, Erik, "Big Bend Basket Makers," El Palacio, Vol.
XLIII, Santa Fe, 1937.
Sayles, E. B., An Archaeological Survey o] Texas, Gila
Pueblo, 1935.
Setzler, F. M., "A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwest
Texas," American Anthropologist, Vol. 37, 1935.
Smith, V. J., "Indian Pictographs of the Big Bend in
Texas," Publication o] the Texas Folklore Society, No. II,
Austin, 1923.
...................................... , "Archaeological Notes of the Big
Bend Region of Texas," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. III, Abilene, 1931.
Taylor, H. C., Jr., "An Archaeological Reconnaissance in
Northern Coahuila," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 19, 1948:
Woolsey~ A. M., Notes on Horseshoe Ranch Cave, (M. S.),
University of Texas, 1936.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL NOTES ON "rxy¢o
EXCAVATED HOUSE STRUCTURES
IN WESTERN TEXAS
,~. CHARLES KELLEY
In the summer of 1948 an archaeological reconnaissance of
the Texas side of the Rio Grande valley between Redford
and Fabens, Texas was made by the writer. This reconnaissance was financed by a grant from the Institute
of Latin American Studies of The University of Texas
and was sponsored by the Department of Anthropology o~
that institution., In the course of the reconnaissance, 58
archaeological sites were visited and recorded. Of these
sites, 49 were not previously known. Surface collections
were made from 46 sites and excavations were completed at
four sites. Some 5,996 specimens, including 5,689 potsherds,
301 stone artifacts, and six miscellaneous artifacts, were
recovered.
A final report on the reconnaissance and on the laboratory
studies of the artifacts obtained is now in preparation. Since
this report may not be published for some time, it is thought
wise to place on record the information obtained from excavation of two house structures in regions where little information as to house type has previously been available.
One of the two houses here described (House No. 2, Site
57D2-3) was located near the bank of the Rio Grande at
the edge of Redford, Texas. It was excavated in July, 1948.
The second house structure described (House No. !, Site
31C9-5) was located near old Fort Quitman on the Rio
Grande below Esperanza. It was excavated in August, 1948.
Specimens found in both sites are on file at the Anthropology
Museum of The University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
i I wish to express my appreciation for this grant to the Institute of
Latin American Studies, and in particular to Dr. C. ~Ar. H~ckett, Director
of the Institute. Thanks are also extended to Dr. T. 1~. Campbell, Chairman
of the Department of Anthropology of the University of Texas, for his
generous and painstaking support and encouragement in inaugurating and
completlng the reconnaissance. I am also indebted to Mr. Herbert C. Taylor
and ~,ir. Niyrrl !%IcBrtde for assistance for short periods of time, and to i%IYs.
Herbert C. Taylor for expediting correspondence from my office in Austin to
the field camp In its varied locations, l%Irs. Kelley accompanied me throughout the reconnaissance and the work described here Is hers as well as mine.

9O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Site 57D2-3
On the eastern bank of the Rio Grande at the site of the
old town of Polvo, at the Vado Rojo, about one mile southwest of the schoolhouse at the modern village of Redford,
Texas, there is an extensive accumulation of fire-cracked
stone and ash. This midden covers several acres of ground
between the elbow of an arroyo and the river. It is bounded
on the southeast by the road running south from Redford
and by a high gravel terrace. At one spot on the site there
are several large refuse heaps rising a meter or more above
the general level of the midden and containing much artifact material, principally potsherds of the historic period,
some quite recent.

Among the mesquite thickets of the

northern part of the site are depressed areas surrounded by
low mounds of fire-cracked stone, apparently the sites of
pithouses of the historic or late prehistoric period. In the
arroyo to the northeast of the site, lines of charcoal, pit outlines, etc., can be seen in the present cut-bank. Ruins of
recent Mexican houses are visible on the site, and there are
several houses now Occupied.
The site occupies the upper strata of an alluvial terrace,
the surface of which lies about 5 meters above normal~low
water level of the Rio Grande. It lies directly opposite the
mouth of the Arroyo Bayo Nuevo which has a considerable
drainage area in Chihuahua to the west and has a steady but
meagre flow of water. The site lies at the southern edge of
an extensive stretch of alluvial farm land on the eastern,
or Texas, bank of the Rio Grande. Even more extensive
farm lands are formed by the lowlands on the Mexican side
of the river and along both sides of the Bayo Nuevo for
some distance up that arroyo. Besides Site 57D2-3, other
archaeological sites are reported in the farm lands to the
north, and several are known in the rough gravel terrace
country to the south. There are undoubtedly many sites
as yet unreported on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande at
this point, and there is a large modern Mexican farm popu-

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House S~ructures

91

lation with a concentration in the village of Mulatto, several miles down the river.
Settlement of the modern towns of Redford (formerly
Polvo) and Mulatto is said to date back to the building of
the local community diversion dams and ditches about 1872
by groups of migrants from Ojinaga, at the mouth of the
Rio Conchos, and from Julimes farther up that river. Since
there are extensive historic deposits at this site it may have
been occupied throughout most of the historic period. In
1746 the Spaniard Joseph de Ydoiaga led a military expedition to La Junta and explored the general region thereabouts,
including the Redford valley. Ydoiaga noted that Pulicos
Pueblo, which still exists as a modern Mexican hamlet located on the Mexican side of the river about two miles above
the mouth of Alamito Creek, was made up of three Indian
nations or rancherias; the Puliques, the Cibolas and the
Pescados.
Ydoiaga stated that: "These Pescados lived not long ago
on the lower river, moving their rancherias, according to
their wish m~d convenience, from place to place along the
moist lowlands formed by the river, in order to make their
small fields of corn and squash. For fear of the Apache,
seeing themselves too few for defense, they came together
to live at Puliques and are found now at this pueblo."~
The expedition continued down the Mexican side of the
Rio Grande to the entrance to Canon Colorado below Redford. The Redford valley was described and Ydoiaga noted:
"In the middle of this valley, on the edge of the river on the
northern bank, is seen the ancient pueblo called that of
Tapacolmes, the sole vestiges of which are some large
adobe walls which remain standing, those of the church or
chapel. In its environs lived settled in huts the Pescados
(Indians), making their plantations of corn and squash in
2 "Quaderno quee comienz~L con la Carta Orden del Exmo. Senor ~rirrey,
Gouernador y Capitan General de estos Reynos, de resulta de rni Consulta y
DiIigenclas - - - en la Junta de los Rios del Norte y Conchos, y sus Contornos" -_ - - pot el Capn Comandante y Comissarfo dn Joseph de :~rdoiaga~
Archlvo r~eneral de Indias, Audioncia de Mexico, 89-2-3; Dunn TransdrIDts,
1746-1747, A.rc}]ives :Room, The University of Texas. pp. 44-27.

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the moist river lowlands. Because of the Apache, since they
are too few to resist them, they went up to the pueblo of
the Puliques, where they maintain themselves as a group,
as has been said." On the Mexican side of the river, on an
arroyo that came down from the Sierra de la Mula, and
about one league away from the river they found the
jacales of an Apache family. This Apache, called Alonzo
the Baptized, lived there with his family while hunting deer
in the hills, but his actual home was at Pulicos Pueblo where
he lived in peace with the other Indians.
Thus, in 1746 the only occupants of the Redford valley
were the members of one Apache family. The Pescados Indians had abandoned it some time before, and their main
settlement had been that called Tapacolmes on the northern bank of the river, where an adobe church had once
existed. The Tapacolmes Pueblo may be identifiable with
site 57D2-3, since the general location is correct and this is
the only site known to the writer in this vicinity which has
extensive historical deposits.
Site 57D2-3 was first reported to the writer by Mr. V. J.
Shiner, then of Presidio, Texas, and was later visited by
Mr. Victor J. Smith of Alpine, Texas, and by Mr. Donald
J. Lehmer, who was at that time supervising the excavations of the First La Junta Expedition of the School of
American Research and the Sul Ross College at Shafter 7: 1,
the lYlillington Site, near Presidio, Texas. The present site
is located on land owned by Mr. Teofilo Carrasco and Mr.
Julian Carrasco of Redford, Texas, both of whom have
generously granted permission to excavate on their property.
Surface Collections
Surface collections from this made during the 1948 reconnaissance include the following artifacts:
Stone
Chipped Stone: (28 specimens)
Small to medfum flake side
Scrapers or knives.....
9
2
Small end and sfde scrapers ...............

Plate 18, A,B.C.
Plate 18, D.

Arehaeologica~ Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

Finger-shaped scraper.
Thumb-nail end and side scraper
with graver point___
Small leaf blade, fragmentary...........
Utilized flake........
Small to medium cores or rejects ......
Dartpoint, Langtry stemmed_..............

1

Not shown.

1
1
1
6
1

Not shown.
Not shown.
Not shown.
Plate 18, K.
Plate 19, A.

Arrowpoints:
Perdiz Stemme~
Side notched with concave base........
Side notched with notched base_......
Triangular, serrate edges,
concave base ............
Triangular blade, with very short
broad stem
Pecked and Ground Stone: (10 specimens)
Manos one-hand, usage both
faces, shaped_....................... 2
End-notched pebbles ("sinkers").._ 5
Pebble hammerstone, showing usage
at both ends ................................ 1
Discoidal hammerstone, reused scraper................................ 1
Pebble of volcanic tuff with hole
pecked in one surface..................... 1
Pottery

Indian Wares: (4 sherds)
E1 Paso Polychrome_..................... 3
Polished Red ................................ i
Indian-Mexican Wares: (85 sherds)
Conchos Plain............................. 78
C0nchos Red-on-Brown .................. 5
Capote Plain (?)
2
European and Modern Wares: (25 sherds)
Black and Green on Yellow
Crockery (glazed) .......................... 12

Plate 19, B, C.
Plate 19, G.
Plate 19, F.
Plate 19, D.
Plate 19 E.

Plate 18, I.
Plate 18, J.
Plate 18, H.
Not shown.
Not shown.

93

94

. ¯

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Green Crockery (glazed) ............
Brown Crockery (glazed)
Red Crockery (glazed)
Cream Crockery (glazed)
White "China"
........................
Blue-On-White "China"
Green-On-white "China"_ .............
Red-On-white "China" ........................
Brown Glass .........................................

1
3
1
1
2
2
1
1
1

Total Pottery: ................................ 114
Excavations at Site 57D2-3
when Donald J. Lehmer and the writer examined this
site in 1938, dipping bands of charcoal, burned roof clay, and
other evidences of eroding house structures were noted in
the bank of the steep-sided arroyo channel on the northeastern edge of the site. During the present reconnaissance this
spot was again inspected, and three or more structures were
at once discovered in the bank. The arroyo channel at this
point is some 3.5 meters deep, becoming much shallower
toward the southeastern edge of the site, where one branch
of it originates. The material exposed in cross-section in
its bank is almost entirely of alluvial and aeolian origin,
consisting largely of sands, silts, and occasional beds or
PI~ATE 16
Site 57D2-3 PIouse :No. 2
A. Plan. The northern edge of the house had been destroyed by a
modern arroyo channel. Presumably a second pair of large support posts
had been set in the northern end of the floor and a ridge pole had rested
upon the two sets of support poles.
B. Cross sectlon along edge of arroyo. ~I’he house pit had apparently
been cut from the old surface shown. The age of the refuse overlying this
surface and filling most of the pit was not determined. The floor of the pit
had been lined with adobe clay. Burning of the house had hardened and
preserved the floor as well as the pit wails up to the level of the old surface.
C. Longitudinal section. The northern end of the pit, destroyed by
the modern arroyo channel has been reconstructed in dotted lines, l~/ote
relation of floor of old pit to that of present house.
1-). View of the south-east quadrant of house pit. ~2he fire-hardened
adobe floor, the small wail postholes, and the two large support postholes
are shqwn. The lrre~gular .hole ~at the southeast corner is apparently" a
rodent burrow. The Durnea roo~: and part of the walls lay on the floors
together with segments of burned adobe clay bearing the imprint of the
jacai walls at the inside corners.
~.. East side of house pit, showing profile of elder house pit intersected
but not totally destroyed by present pit. The age of the older house was
not determined.
(:Note: The placement ,of the directional arrow is only approximately
correct).

SITE 57 D2-3
House No. 2

SECTION

0
N

0
0

0

0
0
0

0
o

O

VIEW~

SOUTH EAST

OUAORANT

E

EAST SIOE, PROFILE

OF OLOEF~

Archaeological Notes on Two E:ccavated House Structures

97

lenses of gravel. There is considerable charcoal in the upper
50 centimeters of the fill, which in part at this level must
be described as refuse. Toward the southeast, this refuse
dips into an old arroyo cross-section and drops to a depth
of about 1.5 meters. Thus, there must have been an erosional epicycle during or immediately following the occupation of the site.
The first feature excavated was House No. 1 (not shown).
This structure appeared as an irregalarly rectangular pit
cross section in the bank with a clearly marked burned clay
floor about a meter below the surface, and with a dipping
band of burned roof or wall debris containing incidentally
inclusions of burned clay showing the marks of a jacal wall
structure. This burned roof debris in places lay directly on
the floor and in places on an ashy fill. Only about twenty
centimeters of the southern ~nd of the structure remained,
most of it having been destroyed by erosion. The parts that
did remain compared in size and general features with the
southern end of House No, 2,~ which lay parallel to it some
6 meters to the east with its missing northern wall probably
in alignment with the southern wall of House No. 1. The
large central post holes of House No. 2 were not present
in House 1, however, but were replaced by larger holes at
the corner. No specimens were found in House No. 1.
Some 4 meters east of House:No: 2,’~he Cross-section of a
pit about 1 meter wide dnd i meter deep was exposed in the
bank. This did not appear to.have been a house but rather
a storage pit similar to one found at Shafter 7:3 near Presidio. As inthe case of the Shafter 7:3 pit this structure was
filled with boulders 10 centimeters or more in diameter. It
was not excavated.
House No. 2 (Plate 16)
Apparently only the northern end of House No. 2 had
been destroyed by erosion, judging by its size and proportions in relation to similar houses excavated earlier at Shafter 7:1 and Shafter 7:3. This house is a rectangular structure built in a pit and floored with adobe clay. Its present

98

Texas ArcheoIog~cal and Paleontological Society

size is about 2.2 by 2.0 meters; its original size must have
been about 2.5 by 2.2 meters. The pit appeared to have been
cut down some 55 centimeters from an old surface which
lies about 35 centimeters below the present surface. It had
been cut into sandy adobe or silt showing no cultural inclusions at this point, but the material overlying the old
surface and filling the upper part of the pit contained much
charcoal, ash, flint chips, and other indications of human
occupation. The pit of House No. 2 had been cut into the
northern end of an older pit of greater width, but somewhat shallower. The older pit too had an adobe floor and
had been refilled with sandy refuse (Plate 16, C & E) but
no data as to its characteristics, age, or cultural associations were obtained.
House No. 2 had been oriented with its long exit extending approximately north-northeast and south-southwest. It
had been burned and debris from the burned roof and part
of the walls lay on the floor. A line of small postholes, averaging 4 centimeters in diameter and set about 15 centimeters
into the floor was uncovered along the edges of the prepared
adobe floor a few centimeters in from the pit walls. Along
the length of the pit these posts, which were not directly
in line, were spaced about 25 centimeters apart. Almost
midway along the south wall, and set in some 32 centimeters
to the north, was a large posthole about 14 centimeters in
diameter, an estimated 45 centimeters in depth, and Containing the charred butt of a post. About 35 centimeters east
of this hole, and set close to the south wall, was a second
posthole similar in dimensions, and likewise containing a
charred post butt. Presumably, a second set of two large
support posts had been present at the other end of the house
but had been destroyed together with the northern pit wall.
Combining the evidence o~ the postholes, the charred
roof and wall debris, and pieces of burned clay from the
interior of the roof and walls, the house superstrucfure may
be tentatively reconstructed as follows. The walls were
thin and flimsy, supported as they were by small and widely
spaced wall poles. They were probably constructed by tying

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

99

saplings horizontally across the wall poles and other small
vertical poles, ocotilla stalks, etc. across these to form flimsy
wall panels, which in turn were lightly plastered with adobe
clay. The two large posts at each end (?) of the house
probably supported a longitudinal ridge pole. From this
stringer, beams probably extended to small saplings lying
horizontally across the top (in forks?) of the wall posts.
Over these, criss-crossed saplings covered with leaves, grass
twigs, and possibly river cane or corn stalks formed a fairly
thick roof which was then covered with loose silt and sand,
rather than adobe clay. The resulting roof was thus nearly
flat but with a slight pitch, probably in four directions. A
somewhat similar construction is used in making modern
jacal structures in this vicinity,3 but the modern construction is more substantial, the pits are larger but shallower,
if not totally lacking, and often several abutting rooms are
constructed. No evidence of an entrance was found, but a
roof entry seems most probable. Notably, in neither House
No. 2, nor House No. 1, was there any trace of the rectangular plastered blocks of adobe, termed "altars," which occurred midway of the southern end of many of the houses
of similar type excavated in the Presidio vicinity.
In the upper fill of House NO. 2 one sherd of Chupadero
Black-on-W’hite pottery was found, and at a depth of 30 centimeters above the floor a sherd of E1 Paso Polychrome was
recovered. A second sherd of E1 Paso Polychrome was found
on the floor, and in addition the following articles were recovered or noted in place on the floor.
Stone Artifacts: (3 specimens)
Flake side scraper........................ 1
Pestle, with yellow pigment and
scratch marks on one flat
surface (31.Sx10.5x7.5 cm.) ............. 1
"Fetish" (concretion with knobby
protuberances and high polish;
15.Sxll,x9 cm.) .................................. 1

(Plate 18, N)

(Plate 18, P)

(Plate 18, M)

3 See I)onald J’. Lehmer, "Modern Jacales of Presidio," El Pala¢io. Vol.
XLVI, NO. 8, pp. 183-186.

Sant~, Fe, 1939.

Texas Archeologicat and Paleontological Society

100

Other Artifacts: (5 specimens)
Bone awls (made from half of
tibia (?) of small animal, polished;
butt ends missing) .................. :........ 2

Not shown

Antler "tool handle" (portion of
butt of antler, smoothed, distal end
cut evenly and hollowed; might
have served as handle
1
for bone awl)

(Plate 18, O)

Gourd vessel (fragmentary, burned,
no data as to shape but lip
of opening smoothed)

1

Not shown

Textile (charred’ fragmentary,
appeared to be a tassel of
fiber cords)

1

Not shown

Total Specimens from House Floor: 9
It should be noted that the bone awls, the antler handle,
the fragment of textile, the flake side scraper, and the
fragments of gourd came from a small area in the northeastern quadrant of the house, suggesting that the former may
originally have been in the gourd container.
PLATE 17
Site 31C9-5 House 1~o. 1
A~ Plan. The dimensions and outlines of the house pit and the poet
supports are shown approximately correct but the Irregularity of the
eroded floor and the position of the gully is only indicated. The northwestern corner of the pit had been eroded to the level of the floor and
the actual walls could not he located. The dashed line indicates the edge
of the floor and the approximate location of the wall.
B. Cross section. The origlna~. surface level was not determined but a
surface level preserved locally in bush clumps probably approximates it,
as shown.

C. ~lew. The straight line cutting across the foreground is the edge
of the present road cut. The eroding flat, almost denuded of vegetation,
surrounding the house was littered with potsherds.
D. Post support~ No trace of postholes was found in the house floor
or adjoining the pit. Two main, support posts had apparently been set
upright with their butt ends flush with the floor. ~round the bases wet
adobe clay had been plastered, producing the feature shown.
4 Kelley, pp. 31-38, in J. Charles Kelley, T. N. Campbell,~ and Donald
J. Lehmer, "The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological
Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas," West Texas Historical and
Scientific Society Publication, No. 10.
(Su! Ross State Teachers College
Bulletin, VoL ~, ~To. 3), .~.]ptne, Te~u~, 1940,

SITE

31¢9-5

House No.I

PLATE

ArchaeoZog~cal Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

103

Site 57D2-3: Conclusions
The artifacts from the surface of the site contain such
diagnostics of the Bravo Valley Aspect, as end-notched pebbles snub-nose, flake side, and thumb-nail scrapers, fingershaped scrapers, shaped two-faced one-hand manos, Pe~diz
Stemmed, side-and base-notched, and triangular arrowpoints; and the pottery types Conchos Plain, Conchos Redon-Brown, Capote Plain, Polished Red, and El Paso Poly:
chrome. From fill and floor of House No. 2, the stor~e pestle,
bone awls, and Chupadero Black-on-White are likewise traits
occurring in Bravo Valley Aspect components. Houses No.
1 and 2 .represent a type commonly. found in sites of the
aspect. The Langtry Stemmed point belongs with an older
cultural horizon and is probably instrusive at this site.
House No. 2 (and probably No. 1 also) beldng typologi,
cally to the La Junta Focus of the Bravo Valley Aspect, and
the pottery types found in the fill and on the floor confirm
this identification. The lack of an "altar" is interesting but
sufficiently common in such La Junta Focus houses to be
without especial significance. The longitudinal ridge pole
superstructure, if the interpretation given here is correct,
has not been specifically noted in other La Junta houses but
may have occurred. The presence of one sherd of Chupadero
Black-on-White in the fill, the presence of an older house,
presumably of the La Junta Focus likewise since cultures
with permanent houses older than this focus are not known
from the region, and the lack of an altar together suggest
that House No. 2 belongs to the latter part of the La Junta
Focus and that it was probably occupied between about 1300
and 1400 A. D., if not slightly later.
The remainder of the surface artifacts, in particular the
large number of wares of European. wares of late date, together with the lack of early European intrusives such as
Spanish or Mexican Maiolica and native wares such as Chinati Plain and Capote Red-on-Brown suggest a very late
historic occupation for the site, perhaps very late Conchos
Focus (dated tentatively at 1700-1800 A. D.) or even early
modern (Alamitos Focus). Since many of the historic wares

104

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

are modern, since a ware nearly if not actually identical
with Conchos Plain is still used and/or made locally, and
since the original site of Polvo is said to have been located
here, all of the artifacts not strictly attributable to the. La
Junta Focus and perhaps also the large refuse heaps near
the center of the site may be assigned to the early modern
occupation, probably beginning about 1870. There are thus
no artifacts attributable to the late prehistoric and early historic Concepcion Focus (dated at circa 1400, to 1700 A.D.)
nor any that can certainly be referred to the Conchos Focus
(circa 1700-1800 A.D.) However, the large pithouses visible
at the surface in the northern part of the site are characteristic Concepcion or Conchos Focus types, and Concepcion
Focus components, at least, are notoriously lacking in surface pottery. The point must be settled by future excavation.
Site 31 C9-5
This site is located just northeast of the county Rio Grande
Valley road about 8 miles down the river from Esperanza
in Hudspeth County, Texas. It was discovered in August,
1948 during the Rio Grande reconnaissance. Specimens and
field notes are on file at the Anthropology Museum of The
University of Texas at Austin.
The site consists of potsherds, occasional fire-cracked
stones, and rare traces of dwellings scattered over an eroding alluvial flat. The flat represents the floor of a shallow
draw which rises in the Quitman Mountains, five or more
miles to the northeast, and disappears in the lowlands of
the Rio Grande Valley about 50 meters below the site. At
this point the draw is 50 meters or more in width and is
bounded by low gravel terrace remnants on either side. It
is now traversed by several gullies, one or more meters in
depth, and much of the flat has been reduced by wind and
water erosion to a bad-lands topography. A few bushes of
mesquite and greasewood and occasional cacti scattered
over the eroding flat constitute the entire vegetative cover;
much of the area is barren of any sort of vegetation. Occasional clumps of mesquite shelter residual alluvial deposits

Archaeological’Note son Two Excavated House Structures

105

with an old surface level visible at about 50 to 80 centimeters above the present average leveI of the fiat. Scattered
sherds and occasional hearth-stones visible on the eroded
surface appear to have been dropped from a higher level
and traces of the burned floors of two houses occupied
slight elevations in the present flat, although they probably
were constructed in pits.
The Rio Grande alluvial valley laud below the site is
now covered entirely by irrigated farms. No data are available but it is probable that extensive farming in this section
and at a distance of about a mile from the river has developed only after installation of the Elephant Butte irrigation system. Prehistoric farming was probably dependent
on river flood irrigation, and in the vicinity of Site 31C9-5
temporal fields at the mouth of the draw may have been
used.
Surface Collections
Surface collections made at Site 31C9-5 during the 1948
reconnaissance include the following specimens:
Stone Artifacts: (5 specimens)
Mano, one-hand, unshaped,
one-faced ....................................................... !

(Plate 18, L)

Hammerstone, discoidal .............................

1

(Plate 18, G)

Cores or rejects ....................................

2

(Plate 18, E, F)

Projectile point, fragmentary (type?) ...... 1
Potsherds:

(367 specimens)

E1 Paso Polychrome ...................................... 27
E1 Paso plain ware (plain sherds
of El Paso Brown or Polychrome,
undifferentiated) ..................................... 135
a~finis Three Rivers Red-onTerra Cotta ................................................. 1
Plain terra cotta ware, as above ................ 70
Brown ware with red painted lip .......... 1
Brown ware, unidentified_ ......................... 16

Not shown

106

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

Banded-incised ware (Mimbres ?) ........ 3
Banded-corrugated ware (Mimbres ?) .... 11
(Playas ?) Corrugated ware................. 3
Deep-corrugated ware.............................. 67
23
Smeared-ribbed ware__ ....
Brushed ware.......................................... 5
Unidentified plain sherds.............. 4
Potsherde disc, smeared-ribbed ware ...... 1
Total specimens from
surface collections

(Plate 19, N) .
(Plate 19, J)
(Plate 19, L,M)
(Plate 19, I)
(Plate 19, K)

372

House No. 1 (Plate17)
A local accumulation of charcoal and pieces of burned
clay showing the imprint of an jacal wall or roof was the
only surface indication of the presence of this house. On
excavation it appeared that only the floor of the structure
and a small section of the lower part of the pit walls on the
southeastern and southwestern sides remained, together with
the contents of the shallow pit thus preserved.
The house itself was an almost square structure, averaging about 4.3 meters on a side, with diagonals extending
almost due north and south. Erosion of the flat had destroyed part of the floor at the northern corner and one
shallow gully cut across the house as well as several minor
erosional troughs or pits, not shown on the house sketch.
The walls of the southern corner of the pit had slumped
but the edge of the floor outlined clearly their former location. It was impossible to determine the original depth of
the pit but it can not have been great since there is no surviving evidence that the flat ever stood more than 80 centiPLATE 18
Artifacts from Site 57D2-3 and Site 31C9-6.
A, B, C,--Flake side scrapers or knives, surface, Site 57 D2-3; D--Small
end and side scraper, surface, Site 57 D2-3; E-F--4~ores or rejects, Site
31 C9-6, surface; G~Discotdal hammerstone, surface, Site 31 C9-5; H, I,
K--Surface. Site 57D2-3; I:[--Pebble hammerstone, I,--Two-faced, shaped,
mane one-hand, J--End-notched pebble (sinker?), K--Core or reject
Unshaped mane, one faced, one hand, Site 31 C9-5, surface; :M:. N, O--Site
31 C9-6, floor of House 3: M----Concretion, indications of handling--fetish?,
N--Flake side scraper, O--Antler section, with shaped butt, hollowed endtool handle?, P--Pestle, with considerable wear in cone shaped area at right
end, also peck-marks and yellow pigment on lower forward face as shown.

Archaeologica~ Notes on Two.Excavated House Structures

J

H

PLATE

18

107

108

Te.~:as Archeologi.cal and .Paleontological Society

meters higher than at present, and the pit may have been
dug from a considerably lower level. The greatest depth of
the pit as now preserved was found to be about 10 centimeters.
The floor and lower walls of the original pit had been
covered with a layer of adobe not greatly different in
texture or color from that of the surrounding flat. No postholes were found in the floor, but roughly in line parallel
to the southeastern pit wall, the butt ends of two posts, 11
and 12 centimeters in diameter,, respectively, had been placed
on the floor and held in position by plastering against them
masses of wet adobe clay, averaging 36 centimeters in diameter and 10.5 centimeters high (Plate 17, D). Careful
troweling of the western half of the house and of the flat
just outside the pit revealed no evidence of any other vertiCal post support or post-hole. The type of super-structure
therefore is unknown, although from the burned remains on
the floor it is known that the roof was made of criss-crossed
small saplings covered with a layer of adobe clay 3 to 7
centimeters in thickness. It is difficult to visualize a superstructure capable of supporting such a relatively firm roof
based on only two major supports and placed in such a
shallow pit. Perhaps posts were set upright in other parts
of the pit without holes or adobe supports. At any rate the
structure seems to have been of remarkably flimsy construction and was probably intended for only temporary, perhaps
seasonal, usage. Interestingly enough, one of the two other
poorly preserved house floors noted at this site also contained an adobe cast of a post butt set squarely on the floor,
indicating that the structure type was not sheerly the
result of individual eccentricity on the part of one Indian.
On the floor near the northeastern corner of the pit there
were many charred beans of the ~ornillo or screwbean tree
(Prosopis pubescens), and fragments of a charred and
crushed coiled basket. Examination of a few relatively
intact fragments indicated that the basket was probably an
example of two-rod-and-bundle, split-stitch construction,
although no further details were ascertainable. A large

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

109

quartz crystal (Plate 19, H) also lay on the floor and several
potsherds, as listed below, were found either on the floor or
in the mass of burned roof debris lying directly upon it.
Pottery From Floor o~ House No. I
E1 Paso Brown (or a very early phase of
E1 Paso Polychrome, since one direct rim
sherd had a black line on rim)
...
a]finis Three Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta
Plain Red-Brown, polished.....
Plain Brown
Deep-corrugated ..................................................
Total sherds.

5
1
1
1
1
9

Site 3IC9-5: Conclusions
The cultural affiliations and chronological position of this
site are not clear. The stone artifacts offer no clues either
as to age or affiliations. Split-stitch coiled basketry is a trait
of the Chisos Focus of the Big Bend Aspect~ and of the
Hueco Phase.s The specific house type has not, as far as the
writer knows, been reported elsewhere. The quantity of
pottery and the specific types suggests definite Southwestern
affiliations, and specific relationships with the Jornada
Branch of the Mogollon culture.~
Since the evidence favors a very short period of occupation, the pottery from the house may be lumped with that
of the surface collection for further comparison. Nevertheless, it should be remembered that all of the definite E1
Paso Brown ware sherds came from the house, and that
none of the later E1 Paso Polychrome sherds were found
there, though a number of them were found on the surface.
5 I~elley, pp. 28-30, in Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, op clt., 1940: E. B.
Sayles, "An ~rchaeological Survey of Texas," Medallion Papers, I~To. XVII,
Globe, 1935, Chart 8; Victor J. Smith, "The Split-Stitch B~ket~A Big Bend
Culture ~" Bullotln of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society, ~ol. % pp. 1~-10~, ~btlene, 1935.
6 Co~ve illustrates ~n example of two-~-~d-bundle spilt-stitch
b~ke~ from C~e 1 In ~ ~ueco ~ount~lns. assi~ed to the ~ueco
ke~aker (~eco ~hase). C. B. Cosine, "C~ves of the Upper
~ueco ~r~s ~ ~ew ~exI~ ~d ~exas," Pape~ of the Pea~dy Museum
~f Amerl~ A~haeology and Ethnology, ~ U~lve~lt~, ~oL XX~,
~o. 2. C~mDrldge, 194~. ~lg. 96 a.
7 Don~d J. ~hmer, "~e JopPa Branch of ~o ~llon," Unive~ity
of Arizona Bulletin, Vol. ~X, No. 2. Tucson, 1948.

110

Texas Archeotogical and Paleontological Society

It is probable that many of the plain E1 Paso sherds in the
surface collection are actually specimens of E1 Paso Brown;
lacking rim sherds this cannot be definitely determined. At
any rate, the following points should be noted:
(1). E1 Paso wares represent the dominant types and the
only definitely identified painted types. E1 Paso Brown, an
early form of E1 Paso Polychrome, and classic E! Paso Polychrome are represented. The E1 Paso Polychrome apparently is represented in greater quantity than the E1 Paso
Brown.
(2). Wares related to Three Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta
but not definitely assignable to that ware are well represented.
(3). Textured wares, including banded-incised, bandedcorrugated, deep-corrugated, smeared-ribbed, and brushed
wares are present in quantity. Some of them seem to be
identifiable as Mimbres Corrugated wares; others as Playas
Corrugated wares of the Chihuahua Culture; others are of
unknown affiliations.
(4). Plain or polished brown wares, including one sherd
with a red painted lip, of unknown affiliation are represented.
(5). Notably lacking are important ceramic types common in nearby Jornada Branch components, such as Chupadero Black-on-White, Mimbres Black-on-White, true
Three Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta, and the various Chihuahua
Polychromes and Playas incised wares.
A general consideration of all these points suggests that
the culture represented is a local variant of the Jornada
Branch, probably approximating most closely the transition
between the Mesilla Phase and Dona Ana Phase. The
amount of E1 Paso Polychrome present, the large quantity
of corrugated sherds, and the lack of Mimbres Black-onWhite probably means that the site dates later than the
Mesilla Phase. The presence of both early and developed
E1 Paso Polychrome, E1 Paso Brown, Mimbres (?) Corru-

Notes on Two Excavated Howe St~ct~es

111

E

H
G

F

I

J

K

PLATE 19
/~rtl~acts from Site 57D2-3 and Site 31C9-5.
A--Langtry Stemmed dart. point, surface, Site 57 D2-~; B-G,--Arrow~ints from suttee of Site 57 D2-3; ~ C (?)~Perdlz Stemmed; ~oncav~
~e, wl~gu~r point; ~m~l point ~th br~ sho~ s~ght b~ed stem;
~lde notched and b~e no~h~ point; ~ide no~h~ ~Int wt~ ~ncave
b~e; H~u~ c~ys~ f~m floor of House 1, Site 31 C9-5; I-N--Po~he~s
f~m su~e of Site 81 C9-5: I~e~ed-rlbbed utiil~ w~e; J-Bandedco~t~ u~llty ~MImbres Co~te~7; .K--B~shed ~re;
Deep-co~ugated utility ware; N--Banaed-inc]sea u~tlity w~Mim~res?

112

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gated, and a ware related to Three Rivers Red-on-Terra
Cotta suggests that the early part of the Dona Ana Phase is
represented. The lack of Chupadero Black-on-White and St.
Johns Polychrome suggests that the full Dona Ana Phase
had not yet developed, and the further lack of any of the
Rio Grande glaze wares, Lincoln Black-on-Red, and the
Chihuahua polychrome wares indicates that the E1 Paso
Phase is not represented. The latter inferences are supported by the fact that sites containing these wares in quantity, but notably lacking in E1 Paso Brown, were found only
a few miles away in both directions. The age of the site
probably falls, therefore, at about circa 1100-1150 A. D., following Lehmer’s datings.o The settlement probably represents a temporary seasonal farming camp which utilized
run-off of the draw for the irrigation of temporal fields, or
perhaps this was a camp established for the purpose of collecting $ornillo beans. At any rate there appears to have
been very little occupation of the region before this time, and
Sitd 31C9-5 may well have been a pioneer settlement, which
might account for its aberrance in detail from the cultures
with which it affiliates.
General Conclusions
Since the full results of the 1948 reconnaissance are not
included here, it is impossible to draw general conclusions
without bringing data into the discussion which have not
been presented in the preceding pages. In order to place
the two sites described into a general cultural framework,
however, it may be noted that there appears to have been a
general expansion of farming communities, derived culturally from the Jornada Branch, down the Rio Grande
valley either through diffusion or migration or both, beginning around 1000 A. D., and culminating in areal expansion
at about 1300-1400 A.D. Following the period of greatest
expansion there was a more or less simultaneous disappearance of all of these farming communities above the Presidio
80p, c|t., pp. 75-89. A full discussion of the various ceramic complexes,
their serlatlon, and their chro~ology, as followed above, is contained In the
page~ cited.

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

113

Valley, probably around 1400-1450 A.D. Around the mouth
of the Rio Conchos in its own valley and the nearby valley of
the Rio Grande and downstream in the Redford Valley,
agricultural colonies survived the general disappearance
and continued in existence in modified form until quite
recent times.
In part at least, it seems that the swift spread of a farmLug economy down the Rio Grande took place, was caused
by, and occurred during a period of somewhat improved
climatic conditions (from the standpoint of primitive
farmers). Similarly, there is some evidence that the sudden
and nearly universal extinction of these same farming settlements along the Rio Grande above the Presidio Valley
is to be attributed to the passing of these favorable climatic
conditions, rather than by the pressu.r_e of nomadic tribes
such as the Apache in the region. Accordingly, the survival
of the farming settlements near and below the mouth of
the Rio Conchos is attributable to the much greater and
more dependable water supply for available flood irrigation
contributed by the Rio Conchos.
The two sites discussed fall into their respective places
in this framework. S~te 31C9-5 is a relatively early colony
established as part of the general movement down the Rio
Grande. Site 57D2-3 is a site first established at the height
and near the close of this period of colonization, but one
which may have survived the period of destruction and
continued in occupation into modern times, or else was
abandoned and later reoccupied.
J. CHARLES KELLEY,

DEPARTIVIENT OF ANTHROPOLOGY,
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS.
Manuscripts Cited
Ydoiaga, Joseph de
1746. "Quaderno que comienza con la Carta Orden del
Exmo. Senor Virrey, Gouernador y Capitan General
de estos Reynos, de resulta de mi Consulta y Diligencias . . . en La Junta de los Rios del Norte y

114

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Conchos,~y sus

Contornos"...

por el Cap" Coman-

dante y Comisario dn Joseph de Ydoiaga. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de Mexico, 89-2-3;
Dunn Transcripts, 1746-1747, Archives Room, The
University of Texas. pp. 44/27--52/32.
Re]erences Cited

Cosgrove, C. B.
1947. "Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New
Mexico and Texas," Papers o] the Peabody Museum
of American Archaeology and Ethnology. Harvard
University, Vol. XXIV, No. 2. Cambridge.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. "The Association of Archaeological Materials With
Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of
Texas," West Texas Historical and Scientqic Society
Publication No.: Ten, Sul Ross State Teachers College
Bulletin, Vol. XXI, No. 3..Alpine.
Lehmer, Donald ~[
19--. "Modern Jacales of Presidio," El Palacio, Vol. XLVI,
No. 8, pp. 183-186. Santa Fe.
1948. "The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon," University
of Arizona Bulletin, Vol. XIV, No. 2. Tucson.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. "An Archaeological Survey of Texas, " Medallion
Papers, No. XVII. Globe.
Smith, Victor J.
1935. "The Split-Stitch Basket--A Big Bend Culture
Trait," Bulletin o] the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 100-104, Abilene.

CAVES AND SHELTERS IN DAWSON
AND BORDEN COUNTIES
East of Lamesa and south and southwest of O’Dormell in
Dawson County, on the Dean Ranch which was the C. C.
Slaughter estate, a number of draws converge to form the
head waters of the Colorado River of Texas. The most important of these little streams is locally known as Tobacco
Creek. Until recent years, Tobacco Creek was a running
stream fed by springs emanating from the water sands of
the High Plains. The creek was used as a camping place
for Indians, and later during the cattle epoch, it was an
important watering place for cattle herds being trailed
either westward or northward. Into Tobacco Creek from the
northwest, flows Dry Tobacco, an intermittent stream.
The convergence of these two streams, together with
several smaller, unnamed draws, creates a well-defined
valley some six or seven miles across. The Cap Rock of
the High Plains forms the sides of the U-shaped valley with
the opening to the southeast. That part of the Cap Rock on
the northeast of the valley is a deposit of Comanchean limestone whose thickness is not known, but which is exposed
for fifty or sixty feet along the rim. From the top of the
rim to the bottom of the valley is a vertical distance of approximately two hundred feet. Along this rim for a distance
of eight to ten miles are occasional rock shelters and caves
(Plate 20). Some of these contain evidence of pre-historic
occupation.
These shelters and caves were brought to our attention by
Mr. Ben NIoore of O’Dormell, Texas. Mr. ~¢Ioore is an amateur archaeologist who has lived in that area for about forty
years.
FINGERPRINT CAVES
This site is six miles east and eight miles south of O~Donnell. The two caves are much alike in regard to size and
shape, both containing hand prints~ No artifacts were found

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

in the south cave, and the only evidence of occupation is the
smoked ceiling and the hand prints.

In fact, there is a

greater number of hand prints in this cave than the north
cave in which the excavation was done.
The south cave is eighteen feet from the entrance to the
back. At the widest point, which is a line drawn from the
north side of the entrance to a point to the south of the
center of the back wall, the measurement is nineteen feet
seven inches. The height at the center of the cave is four
feet six inches while the height at the entrance is five feet
four inches. The width at the entrance is ten feet nine inches
(Plate 20). The floor of this cave rises toward the back
with about a fifteen degree slope, which probably accounts
for the fact that almost no fill had accumulated, and the
rock floor is exposed throughout the area of the cave..
The entrance to the north cave is at the same level in the
limestone bluff and fifteen feet to the north. This one
measures sixteen feet between north and south walls and
nineteen feet at the widest point, which is a line drawn
from a point south of the entrance to a point to the north
of center of the back wall. The height at the center is four
feet seven inches, and at the mouth, it is four feet one inch.
The entrance is ten feet six inches wide (Plate 20). The
floor in this instance slopes ~¢ery gradually to the center
from back, front, and sides. To this fact may be attributed
the four to six inches of fill which had accumulated since
the cave was occupied. The fill consisted of a mixture of
very fine wind-blown dust and ashes. The ceilings and
walls in both caves were heavily blackened with smoke. A
ledge extends for about ten feet in front of both entrances.
Small native shrubs, scrub oak, mesquite, and poison oak,
grow at the edge of the ledge and continue down the slope.
The first trip to the location was made on April 11, 1948,
at which time only a preliminary examination was made.
Several good artifacts were uncovered, and it was decided
to return the following week for further excavation. The
second trip was made on April 18. The party consisted of an

Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties

117

PLATE 20
Loc~tlorl, floor, a;ad cross section of Fingerprint caves and Moore’s shelter.

118

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

anthropology class, under the direction of Dr. W. C. Holden,
and photographers and others interested in the work. As
the fill was typical of that usually found in dry caves, it was
¯ necessary for members of the party to wear respirators while
working. The crew was divided in two groups,--the shovelers and the sifters. Each spadeful of material was sifted
through quarter-inch wire mesh; the artifacts were removed,
and the residue dumped over the ledge (Plate 21 A).
Artifacts of Fiber
A total of seventy-three pieces of cordage, thirty-three of
which contained square knots, was discovered. They came
almost exclusively from the northeast corner of the north
cave. They varied in size from stringlike pieces about the
diameter of heavy twine to specimens one-fourth of an inch
in diameter. The cords are all of the same type, having two
strands which are twisted in a counter-clockwise direction.
The texture of the cordage varies from a soft, fuzzy material
to a hard, coarse fiber. No complete snares or nets were
unearthed; however a piece of cordage was found which
could easily have been part of a net. It consisted of three
portions of cordage tied together at opposite ends to form a
triangular shaped piece (Plate 22 B).
A small brush, made of a section of yucca stem was
secured. It is about four inches long and three-eighths of
an inch in diameter. It is similar to brushes used to paint
Pueblo pottery.
Pottery
One potsherd was discovered which appears to have had
a hole drilled through it. The fragment was broken so that
the portion of the hole that remains lies along the break on
one side. The sherd is black on one side and reddish-orange
on the other. The piece is so small that it is impossible to
PLATE ."i
A. Looking west from the interior of South Fingerprint cave.
B, and C. Hand imprints on ceiling of South FingerDrint c~ve.

A.
B,

PLATE 22
Flint ~tlfactS from Nor~ Fingerprint cave.
Cordage ~rom North Fingerprint c~ve.

PLATE 22

Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties

123

identify which side was the o.utside~ or to, classify it (Plate

22
A small number-of flint artifacts was secured. Among
these were five sc~:apers, one crude, apparently unfinished
knife, one quartzite hammerstone, and one triangular shaped
knife one inch thick and made .of red jasper. (Plate 22 A).
This artifact has been very carefully made. A beautifully
shaped spoke-shave was found, but unfortunately misplaced
before it reached the Museum. In the cave were also several
fragments of a metate and a part of one mano.
Food Materials
Possible food materials found .consisted of acorns, small
wild onions, and grass seed. Among the animals represented
by bones were prairie dog, rabbit, bird, and deer.
Charcoal
There were small pieces of charcoal throughout all the
floor area; however, it is difficult to determine how much
of it may be attributed to the prehistoric inhabitants.
Ma~ed Grass
A layer of matted grass was present throughout most of
the floor area round the walls. The greatest amount was
concentrated in the northwest corner; most of the cordage
also came from this area. There the grass layer averaged
four inches in thickness, while the layer at other places
around the walls varied from just a trace to a thickness of
one inch. None of the grass was found in the center of the
floor nor at a greater distance than two feet from the walls.
Hand Prints
There were twenty hand prints in the south room. They
varied in size from that of a small child to that of an average
size woman. It was the concensus of opinion that the prints
were made by painting around the ha~ad with a light colored
substance on the back of the ceilings and walls, thus forming
negative prints (Plate 21 B, 21 C).

124

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A nearby group of shelters that have not yet been ex~
cavated contain several hand prints made in the same way,
except that red paint was used instead of white.
MOORE’S ROCK SHELTER
Moore’s Rock Shelter faces southwest and is the largest of
all those located to date. It averages 108 feet in width, while
the mouth has a span of 124 feet. It varies in depth from
twenty to thirty-nine feet, and the height ranges from three
feet at the back and sides to twenty feet at the front
(Plate 20).
The floor in the east and center sections is so steep that
no debris has accumulated. The limestone floor is exposed
in many places, and no artifacts were recovered in this area.
From the fill in the north side, which varied from one to
eighteen inches, numerous artifacts were collected.
Ar~i]acts o] Stone
Four projectile points were discovered, all of which are
of the barbed type. Two are about an inch and a half long,
and the other two are less than one inch in length. All are
made of flint of a light brown color. Nine scrapers and one
graver were al~o identified (Plate 23). Fifteen flint cores
and some 180 flint chips were secured. One large mano was
found about six inches below the surface. It is oval shaped,
measures about eight inches by five inches and shows wear
on both sides.
Cordage
Only one specimen of cordage was discovered. It was
about nine inches long and three-eighths inch in diameter.
It lay six inches below the surface in a layer of leaves and
dark earth.
PLATE 23
~krttfacts from Moore’s Shelter.
PLATE 24
A, Basket from Moore’s Shelter.
B. Skeleton of infant from Moore’s Shelter,

Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties

129

Matted Grass
The residue contained a large amount of matted grass
similar to that found in Fingerprint Cave.

It was deposited

in layers two to three inches thick over a fairly wide area
of the floor. It lay at an average depth of eight inches below
the surface.
Charcoal
Charcoal was found throughout the debris, from the surface to the lowest layers.

One hearth containing charcoal

and ashes was eight inches below the surface.

It had been

constructed with five stones all of which showed the effects
of oxidation.

The hearth was ten inches in diameter on the

inside.
Food Materials
Acorns and wild onions made up most of the vegetal food
material, while numerous bones were found, at Ieas~ ninety
percent of which were from small rodents.

Other animals

represented in the collection are lizards, turtle, fish, and
birds. Antelope bones were present and fragments of larger
bones, probably buffalo, were also found.
Basketry
Three baskets were located about eighteen inches from the
north wall of the shelter. They lay superimposed on each
other, the largest on the top and t.he smallest on the bottom.
They were all of the tray type and had been placed on the
floor of the shelter in an inverted position. The diameters
of these baskets were respectively sixteen inches, ten and
one-half inches, and eight and one-half inches.
The weave is apparently a non-interlocking stitch over a
bundle of fibers. They are like the corresponding type of
the Big Bend Basketmaker culture (Plate 24 A). Another
small fragment of a basket was found on the opposite side
of the shelter.

130

Texas Archeotogical and Paleonto~ogical Society

Miscellaneous
A tubular bone bead lay near the surface in a layer of
grass matting about eighteen inches from the baskets.

It

is one inch long and not quite one-half inch in diameter.
Both ends show that they have been smoothed (Plate 23).
A hollow piece of cane, which had been burned on one end,
came from the general area of the baskets.

It seems pos-

sible that this may have been a "Cigar." Twenty-five pieces
of mica and as many shell fragments were recovered.
Burial
The only burial encountered throughout excavation was
that of a young infant. Judging from tooth and skull development, the child may have been from three to six months
old at time of death. The cause of death was not apparent.
The skull contains numerous small depressions resembling
pock marks, but we have formed no opinion as to whether
they were there at time of death, or whether they may be
attributed to some post-mortem action. No burial position
was discernible; the bones were completely jumbled. The
skull lay on a smooth, flat stone about six inches in diameter.
A dark fibrous substance surrounded the bones, but if the
child had been wrapped in matting or any other material at
the time of burial, it had completely disintegrated (Plate
24 B).

Conclusions
It is not our purpose to draw conclusions. Our principal
object is to present what we have found with the hope that
it may furnish for someone better qualified a little piece
of the puzzle that is now prehistoric man in this area.
Due to the shallowness of the fill, it was not possible to
determine whether or not Fingerprint Caves were occupied
in historic or only in prehistoric times. In each sifting we
were as likely to find a piece of newspaper or an empty
cigarette package as we were to find a piece of cordage or
a flint specimen. However, the material was better strati-

Caves and ShelSers in Dawson and Borden Counties

131

fled in Moore’s Shelter, and we saw no evidence of white
contact after the first six inch layer was removed.
Lack of pottery, except for one sherd found near the
surface, would indicate a non-pottery culture, which leads
one to wonder if these people could be contemporary with
more well known pre-pottery cultures. Dr. Charles Kelley
suggests that we may have found a new locus of a regional
aspect. Dr. H. P. Mera is of the opinion that a careful comparison of the basketry and cordage from these caves with
that found in caves to the west and north might reveal cultural connections in those directions. Victor J. Smith saw
some relationship with the Big Bend Culture. A more detailed study of both the fiber and stone artifacts is necessary
before more definite conclusions may be drawn.
There are several similar shelters in the vicinity showing
evidence of occupation. ~When these are excavated and their
materials studied, we shall have a broader view of the
people who lived in them and shall feel better prepared to
make comparisons with seemingly similar cultures in other
areas.

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
REPORT OF THE NOMENCLATURE COMMITTEE

At the Sixth Plains Archaeological Conference in Lincoln,
Nebraska, on November 25, 1948, I outlined the several suggestions
approved at our meeting in Austin on October 23, 1948, regarding
the aims and objectives of a committee on archaeological nomenclature. Considerable discussion followed. Briefly, the following
points were adopted: (1) The work of the committee should be
continued. (2) The committee should consist of two members, one
from the northern Plains area and one from the southern Plains
area. (3) The terms defined should include all technical terms
commonly used in archaeological publications. (4) The scope of
the definitions should be confined, at first to those used in the
Plains area and later expanded to include all archaeological areas
of North America. (5) The committee should solicit help from as
many archaeologists as is practicable. (6) The results of the work
should be eventually published in handbook form and circulated
as widely as possible.
,~ack Hughes, now working for the River Basin Surveys in the
Missouri Basin, was appointed to represent the northern Plains area
on the committee and I was appointed to represent the southern
Plains area. We decided to use the following procedure in working
out a list of terms and definitions:
(1) Establish a card file of
approximately 1,000 terms. (2) For each term, provide the standard definition as given in Webster’s New International Dictionary.
(3) Then we will check archaeological literature and note all
variations in meaning of these terms as used in the past, giving
credit to the writers and noting the specific areas and situations
in which these terms were used. (4) When this card file has been
completed as nearly as seems practicable the material will be
mimeographed and circulated among archaeologists throughout .the
Plains area. Each archaeologist will then have an opportunity to
criticize and select his preference for definitions of these terms or
suggest additional definitions, or additional terms. (5) The results
of this circularization of the material will then be tabulated and
the most widely accepted definitions will be assigned to each term,
with secondary definitions included where necessary.
Other
pertinent data regarding use of the terms including author and area
will also be included. (6) The final results will be published in
the form of a pocket dictionary, and given as wide circulation as
possible.
To date the committee is working on the card file of terms,
selecting dictionary definitions and special definitions, and an-

News Notes and Editorials

133

notating each term with as much data as seems pertinent to the
problem at hand. Occasional reports of progress will be made in
this bulletin and elsewhere. If the reader has any suggestions on
either terms, definitions or methods of procedure they would be
most welcomed by the committee and may be seat to me at the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
ROBERT L. STEPHF&~SON.

THE 1949 ANNUAL MEETING
The twenty-second Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeo!ogical
and Paleontological Society was held May 1-5 on the campus of Sul
Ross State College at Alpine, Texas, in association with the Southwestern Division of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science. The Society is especially indebted to the local committee at Alpine for helping to make our visit there both enjoyable
and interesting; to the program committee of the Society, consisting of Dr. T. N. Campbell, Dr. J. Charles Kelley, and Dr. Alex
D. Krieger, for the interesting papers on our section of the program
and to Dr. Erik K. Reed of the National Park Service at Santa
who was in charge of the over-all program for the Social Sciences.
The following papers were read:
Jane Holden, Further Excavations at F~ngerpr~nt Cave.
Cyrus N. Ray, Report on Research in the AbiIene Region.
E. J. Adams, Remains of Early Man and Extinct Animals ~n Texas.
Ernest Wallace, The Comanche on the White Man’s Road.
E, H. Sellards, Preliminary Report on Excavations at the Kincaid
Shelter, Uvalde County.
Herbert C. Taylor, Jr., A Tentative CulturaI Sequence for the Area
About the Mouth o] the Pecos.
J. Charles Kelley, Archaeology and the Modern World. This was
the 1949 John Wesley Powetl Lecture for the Southwestern Division
of the A.A.A.S.
mE. W.

FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE SOCIETY
In Vol. 19 the secretary-treasurer called attention to the critical
financial condition of the Society and suggested several alternative
possibilities. Fortunately, the sale of a rather large number of
copies of the Bulletin during the year solved the problem temporarily. As a result, it was decided at the Alpine meeting to post-

134

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

pone for the time any increase in annual dues, even if it became
necessary to reduce the size of the Bulletin.
The Society still has available most volumes of the Bu~Iefn at the
original price of $3.00 each. If your file is incomplete, why not
complete it while copies are available and while publication costs
are high? Possibly you can persuade some institutional library
or individual to order, or to become a member of the Society.--E. W.

TI-I:E 1949

BD-LLETIN

We regret that Vol. 20 is considerably smaller than usual The
financial situation is not altogether to blame. Not enough manuscripts were received. This was possibly due to the fact that copy
for Vol. 20 was sent to the printer much earlier this year than has
been customary.
--E. W.

TI-IE 1950 BULLETIN

Manuscripts for inclusion in Vol. 21 should be sent to the editor
as soon as possible. Your co-operation in this matter will enable
him to get out a better Bulletin on time.
--E. W.

THE 1950 ANNUAL MEETING
Those present at the Alpine meeting voted to have the next annual
meeting of the Society in October, 1950, at Canyon, Texas, with
West Texas State College acting as host institution. Tentative plans
indicate that it will be a meeting you will not want to miss.
Anyone having papers or suggestions for the program should
communicate with the program committee as soon as possible.
Members of the committee are Dr. T. N. Campbell, Dr. J. Charles
Kelley, and Dr. Alex D. Krieger, Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas, Austin.
--E. W.

Report

o:f Secretary-Treasurer

135

RF~I:’ORT OF TI-IF~ SF~CRF~TARY.TRI~ASURF~R
OF TH}~ Tt~XAS ARCHI~OLOGICAL AND
I:’ALI~ONTOLOGICAL SOCIt~TY
Report for the twenty-first year from the annual meeting,
October 23, 1948, to the Alpine Meeting, May 3, 1949.
RECEIPTS
Balance on October 23, 1948 .................................................. $ 457.42
Collected on 1947 dues ..................................................................

12.00

Collected on 1948 dues ...........................................................

330.00

Collected on 1949 dues ...................................................................

0.00

Co].lected on sale of Bulletins ........................................................

501.00

Donations .....................................................................................

2.00

TOTAL ........................................................................................ $1,308.42
DISBURSEMENTS
Bank debit for collections ................................................................ $

2.73

Southwestern Engraving Co. for plates for Vol. 19 ................

78.20

Abilene Printing & Stationery Co. for printing Vol. 19 ...........

637.00

Postage ................................................................................................

23.00

To U.S. Copyright Office for copyright of Vol. 19 ....................

4.00

TOTAL ...................................................................................... $ 744.93
Balance on deposit in First National Bank,
Lubbock, Texas, on May 3, 1949 ...................................... $ 563.49
ERNEST V,rALLACE,
Secretary-Treasurer.

136

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

MEMBERSHIP LIST 1948-49
HONORARY MEMBERS
Albert G. Imgalls, Scienti]ic American Magazine,
........................................................................ New York City, N. Y.
& S. Bridwell, Bridwell Oil Co ................................ Wichita Falls, Texas
MEMBERS
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co .................................... Abilene, Texas
E. T. Adams ............................................................. Glen Rose, Texas
American Museum of Natural History. ................. New York City, N. Y.
Am’ericmn Philosophical Society ............................ :_Philadelphia 6, Pa.
Max W. Ball, 1648 Foxhall Road, N. W .................Washington 17, D. C.
D. A. Bandeen, West Texas Chamber of Commerce ...... Abilene, Texas
Baylor University Library .....................................................Waco, Texas
G: C. Benson, Box 381 ..................................................... Whitney, Texas
Joe Benton ............................................................................ Nocona, Texas
W. P. Brennan ............................................................. Crystal City, Texas
Mrs. Charles Brower (Hall Ranch) .................... Richland Springs, Texas
Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution,
. ........................................................................................... Washington, D. C.

C. M. Caldwell .........................................................................Abilene, Texas
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, University of Texas .......................... Austin, Texas
Mrs. Wm. H. Campbell, Box 116, Kings Canyon Road,
..................................................................................... Carson City, Nov.
Sam Chamberlain
Refugio, Texas
Chicago Natural History Museum, Roosevelt Road and
........................................................................ Lakeshore Drive, Chicago 5, Ill.
Cleveland Public Library ............................................... Cleveland, Ohio
Columbia University Library ................................... New York City, N. Y.
Cbrpus Christi City Public Library ..................... Corpus Christi, Texas
Col. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road ................. San Antonio, Texas
Dallas Public Library ................................................................ Dallas, Texas
E. C. de Montel, 1000 City National Bldg ............Wichita Falls, Texas
Frederic H. Douglas, Denver Art Museum, 1300 Logan St.,
................................................................................... Denver 3, Colo.
Dr. C. D. Eaves, Texas Technological College ............ Lubbock, Texas
Helen S. Farrington, E1 Paso Public Library .............. E1 Paso, Texas
Field Museum of Natural History ....................................... Chicago, Ill.
W. S. Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick Drilling Co ........ Corpus Christi, Texas
M. F. Foote, 6110 Mimosa Lane ...................................... Dallas, Texas
R. E. Forrester, 1933 N. 2nd .............................................. Abilene, Texas
W. S. Fulton ........................................................ Dragoon, Arizona
Gila Pueblo .............................................................. Globe, Arizona
Grimes ................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Hardin-Simmons University Library ...................... _Abilene, Texas
R. K. Harris, 9024 San Fernando Way. ........................ _Dallas, Texas

Frank

Membership Li~t, 1948-~9

137

Frank H. Hayne, Texas Technological College ............ Lubbock, Texas
Dr. Frank C. Hibbon, S000 Campus Blvd ...........Albuquerque, N.M.
Dr. T. L. Hodges ................................................. Bismark, Ark.

Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological College ....... Lubbock, Texas
Houston Public Library......................................... Houston, Texas
Institute Panamericano de Geografia e Historia, 192 Avenida
............................ del Observatorio, Tacubaya, D. F., Republica Mexicana
Illinois State Museum.................................................... Springfield, Ill.
A. T. Jackson, 508 E. 46th Street ................................. Austin, Texas
Henry James .................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Joint University Libraries............................................ Nashville 4, Tenn.
Johns Hopkins University Library ............................. Baltimore 18, Md.

Percy Jones, Box 176 ............................................................ Abilene, Texas
Roland Jones .............................................................................Dallas, Texas
L. G. Kammerdiener, Texas Technological College....Lubbock, Texas
Harold M. Kautz, 3253 Sondra Drive ........................ Fort Worth, Texas
Dr. J. Charles Kelley, University of Texas ................... Austin, Texas
Dr. Oscar Kinchen, Texas Technological College........ Lubbock, Texas
Mrs. Forrest Kirkiand, 911 S. Van Buren Avenue .......... Dallas, Texas
Dr. Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas ....................... Austin, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology .......................................... Santa Fe, N.M.
Wann Langston, Jr., Texas Technological College_..Lubbock, Texas
Judge Harry J. Lemley............................................................... Hope, Ark.
Eli Lilly, 5807 Sunset Lane ........................................... Indianapolis, Ind.
Louisiana State University General Library ............ Baton Rouge, La.
Kenneth MacGowan, 10727 LeConte Avenue ........ Los Angeles, Calif.
Dr. J. G. McAllister, University of Texas .......................... Austin, Texas
A. T. MeDannald, Box 2972 .............................................. Houston, Texas
E. A. McIlhenny .............................................................. Avery Island, La.
Dr. S. S. McKay, Texas Technological College .......... Lubbock, Texas
McMurry College ....................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Metropolitan Museum of Art Library, Fifth Ave. and 82nd St.,
....................................................................................... New York 28, N. Y.
Mrs. Glen E. Moore, Rt. I, Box 284 ....................................El Paso, Texas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation,
Huntington Free Library ............................... _2q’ew York City, N. Y.
Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place .......................... Chicago, ILl.
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and
42nd Streets ..................................................... New York City, N. Y.
Northwestern University Library ........................................ Evanston, Ill.
Ohio University Librar~]................................................. Athens, Ohio
Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College .... Stillwater, Okla.
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and ~.thnology,
Harvard University ................................................... Cambridge, Mass.
W. M. Pearce, Texas Technological College .............. Lubbock, Texas
H. A. Pender ...................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept. of American Archaeology._..Andover, Mass.

138

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

Judge Hermon C. Pipkin (Deceased) .......................... Amarillo,
L. A. Rawalt, 725 Post St .................................... Corpus Christi,
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 ......................................... Abilene,
J. Henry Ray, 2130 Fanrdn St ........................................Vernon,
Eh-. Erik K. Reed, National Park Service ................ Santa Fe,
Rev. Henry Retzek, Springhill Rt. 1 ..................... Melrose,
P. M. Rice .............................................Hamilton,
Rice Institute Library ............................................. Houston,
Dr. R. N. Richardson, Hardin-Simmons University...... Abilene,
Thomas F_~ Roberts ............................................. Abilene,
Rosenberg Library............................................. Galveston,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
N. M.
Minm
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas

San Antpnio Public Library .............................. San Antonio, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park_ .............. San Diego, Calif.
E. B. Sayles, Arizona State Museum ...................... Tucson, Arizona
Henry Sayles, Jr ...................................................... Abflene, Texas
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University ..... Dallas, Texas
Judge O. L. Sims ................................................... Paint Rock, Texas
Prof. Victor J. Smith, Sul Ross College .................. _~lpine, Texas
Smithsonian Institution ............................................ Washington, D. C.
Society des Americanistes, Musse de L’ Homme,
Palais de Chaillot .......................................................... Paris, France
F. J. Soday, 1124 West Elm Street .............................. E1 Dorado, Ark.
Southern Methodist University Library ....................... Dallas, Texas
Southwest Museum Library, Highland Park 42 ..... Los Angeles, Calif.
Stephen F. Austin State Teachers’ College
Library.............................................................. Nacogdoches,
R. L. Stephenson" University of Texas ......................... Austin,
Floyd V. Studer, 636 Amarillo Bldg .......................Amarillo,
H. C. Taylor, Jr., University of Texas ............................ Austin,

Texas
Texas
Texas

Texas
Walter W. Taylor, Jr., 711 Camino del Monte Sol ..... Santa Fe, N. M.
Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College
Library ........................................................ College Station, Texas
Texas State Library, Capitol Building ............................. Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library ........................ Lubbock, Texas
Texas Western College ................................................... E1 Paso, Texas
Thomas Gilcrease Foundation .......................................... Tulsa, Okla.
Willis G. Tilton ...................................................... :....Topeka,
Tyrell Public Library .............................................. Beaumont, Texas
University Museum Library, Univ. of Penn.,
33rd and Spruce ....................................... Philadelphia 4, Pa.
University of Arizona Library ...................................... Tucson, Arizona
University of Arkansas Library............................ Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library............................ Berkeley, Calif.
University of California at Los Angeles ................ Los Angeles, Calif.
University of Chicago Library........................................... Chicago, Ill.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library ................ Deuver, Colo.
University of lllinois Library ......................................... Urbana, Ill.

Membership List, 1948-49

139

University of Kansas Library ........................... Lawrence, Kans.
University of Michigan Library ....__Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Nebraska Library......................... Lincoln, Neb.
University of New Mexico Library................... Albuquerque, N. M.
University of Oklahoma Library...................... Norman, Okla.
University of Texas Library ......................... Austin, Texas
University of Utah Library
Salt Lake City 1, Utah
Mrs. W. C. Vernon, Texas Technological College .... .Lubbock, Texas
Waco Public Library.
.Waco, Texas
Dr. Ernest Wallace, Texas Technological College._.__Lubbock, Texas
P. H. Walser, 1102 N. 1st St .........................Temple, Texas
Frank H. Watt, Box 1176.
Waco, Texas
Dr. Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons University____.Abilene, Texas
William C. Watts, 2111 23rd Street__.
Lubbock, Texas
Harry E. Weaver, ]~iels Esperson Bldg.............. Houston, Texas
Dr. C. H. Webb, Children’s Clinic_............ Shreveport, La.
Joe Ben Wheat, University of Arizona
.Tucson, Arizona
Winlder County Free Library
....__Kermit, Texas
A. H. Witte .................................... ___Henrietta, Texas
Witte Museum ................................. San Antonio, Texas
Lloyd O. Wolcott, Box 327 .............................. _Hereford, Texas
R. B. Worthington, 4216 Walker Ave.
__Houston, Texas
Yale University Library.........................._New Haven, Conn.

ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
The Texas Archeological Society (TAS) offers a wide range of opportunities for
those interested in Texas heritage. The mission of the Society is to promote study,
preservation and awareness of Texas archeology.

A recent strategic p~an calls for the

Society to create training opportunities for students, enhance and expand programs,
increase and diversify membership, inform the community of their archeological heritage
and cultivate and preserve resources. The membership generally numbers around !400.
The Society calendar begins in October with the Annua~ Meeting, an event that
has taken place since 1929. Archeologists, professional and avocational, get together to
share information in research sessions and to hear from nationally renowned luncheon and
banquet speakers. Friday is a popular evening for the punic forum with high profile
speakers and artifact identification. Meetings will be held in Lubbock (08) and De~ Rio (09).
Each spring TAS offers sessions of the Texas Archeology Academy. Topics in
this series of workshops inctude Archeology 101 (including a field day), Ceramics: The
Stories Pottery Te~ls, Lithics: Reading Stone Tools, Historic Archeology and Rock Art of
Texas. Each Academy features power point presentations, a manual and hands-on
activities to reinforce concepts presented. In 2009 sessions will be held in Georgetown,
Study Butte, and Lake Jackson. Surveys at the dose of sessions reveal that participants
greatly value the information imparted during the workshop and the camaraderie of fellow
students.
The summer brings a field school that offers an opportunity for folks to
contribute to research about Texas archeology. The principal investigator is supported
by staff and experienced volunteers. Usually around 300 people participate. Newcomers
appreciate an orientation session before joining crews in the field.

Survey and lab

sessions provide other venues for people who want to learn more about the archeo~ogical
process.

The field school in 2009 will be in the Panhandle near Perryton.

We offer

scholarships to college students and Native Americans. A youth program instructs around
60 students each year.
Publications of the Society include a journal, the Bulletin of the TAS, a quarterly
newsletter and two web sites, w~w~t×arc~org is the organizational web site that relates
current programs and opportunities. The other web site is www~exasbeyondhistory,net, a
venue that offers information in the form of multi-level exhibits.

TAS has been a

supporting partner of Texas Beyond History since its inception.
For more information about TAS see www~t×arch~org or call 800 377-7240.

Facsimile Reprint
~ ~!~~
ww~^=,, g u stavslib ra ry. co rn

$24.95

