BULLETIN
OF THE

~exa~ Ar~heo~og~a~ a~
~a~eon~o~og~al ~o~e~y

VOLUME 23
1952

TE x:~s
~
ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY
2009
REPRINT EDITION

BULLETIN
OF THE

~exa~ Ar~haeo~ogka~ au~
~aleon~olog~a~ ~o~e~y
VOLUME 23
1952

ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIFTY
2009
REPENT EDITION

Reprinted with permission of The Texas Archeological Socie.ty,
SanAntonio, Texas by Gustav’s Library, Davenport, Iowa, 2009. This
reprint made J~om an original edition provided by The Texas
A rcheological Socie~:

www.gu stavsli brary, com
1011 E tligh St, Davenport, IA 52803

BULLE~i’iN
OF THE

~exao Ar~heolog~al au~
~laleoulologi~a! ~o~ely

VOLUME TWENTY-THREE
1952

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

BULLETIN
OF THE

exas Ar l ologkal anb
laleo tologi a! o iety
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
By Wilson W. Crook, Jr., and R. K. Harris
7
2. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas
Coast.
By T. N. Campbell ........................................................ 39
3. The Bonnell Site.
By Jane Holden ......................................................... 78
4. Sandals of Feather Cave.
By William B. Roosa .................................................... 133
5. Pottery of the Rio Bonito Area of Lincoln County,
New Mexico.
By Arthur Jelinek ...................................................... 147
6. Archaeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir,
Coryell County, Texas.
By E. O. Miller and Edward B. Jelks ......................... 168
7. Report on Archaeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 1952.
By Joe F. Cason ................................................................. 218
8. The Olmec Phase of Eastern Mexico.
By Robert E. Greengo .................................................... 260
9. The Age of the Melbourne Interval.
By Irving Rouse .................................................................. 293
10. News Notes and Editorials ............................................. 303
11. Book Review ................................................................... 311
12. Report of the Secretary-Treasurer ............................... 313
13. Membership List ............................................................. 314
Vol. 23, 1952 -- Price $5.00
Lubbock, Texas

exas Ar heolog aL
laLeoutoLogkaL
OFFICERS
A~EX KamGEa, Austin, President
CYRUS N. RAY, Abilene, President Emeritus
ROBEaT E. BELL, Norman, Okla., Active Vice-President
EaNF~T W,~LLACE, Lubbock, Secretary-Treasurer
W. C. HOLDEN, Lubbock, Editor o] Publications

DIRECTORS
In Addition to the Above
Floyd Studer, Amarillo
Col. M. L. Crimmins, San Antonio
Mr. O. L. Sims, San Angelo

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
T. N. Campbell, Austin
R. K. Harris, Dallas
Edward B. Jelks, Austin
Erik K. Reed, Santa Fe

Mrs. Glen E. Moore, E1 Paso
Harry E. Weaver, San Angelo
Dr. E. H. Sellards, Austin
Rupert N. Richardson, Abilene

TRUSTEES
Victor Smith, Alpine
R. B. Worthington, Houston
Mrs. Forest Kirldand, Dallas
J. Henry Ray, Vernon

Karl Schmitt (Deceased),
Norman
Ellis W. Shuler, Dallas
Joe Ben Wheat, Tucson
A. H. Witte, Henrietta

FELLOWS

Cyrus N. Ray

Col. M. L. Crimmins

arrmari
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking; for the study of the
history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas;
for the encouragement of the proper
collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums and their
study and classification and the publication of the results of the researches
incident thereto.
The BULLETIN is published annually
for distribution to members Of the society. Opinions expressed herein are
those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent views of the society or
the editorial staff.

TRINITY ASPECT OF THE ARCHAIC
HORIZON: THE CARROLLTON
AND ELAM FOCI
WILSON W. CROOK, ,JR., AND R. K. HARRIS

Two manifestations of the archaic type culture, so widespread elsewhere in Texas, have recently been established
in the Upper Trinity River region of Northeast Texas. This
extends the recognized area of this great complex completely across the state, the Big Bend and Edwards Plateau
aspects having been previously described from West Texas
and Central Texas, respectively. (See Fig. 1).
As proposed, the Carrollton focus and the Elam focus will
constitute the basis for the new Trinity aspect of the Archaic
Horizon. The two individual loci are composed of a combination of published descriptions, together with a large
amount of unpublished material long in the hands of local
investigators. Their assemblages of artifact types and traits
wil! form the subject of this paper, along with certain conclusions, comparisons with other archaic units, and indicated affinities with adjacent areas whose cultures have not
yet been fully defined.
Description of the Region
The Trinity aspect of the archaic centers in the Dallas
County region where the three forks of the Trinity flov~
together to form the main stream. A large number of
archaeological sites in this area provide the type stations
of both the Carrollton and Elam loci; to these are added
others extending up the Elm Fork of the Trinity to the
vicinity of Gainesville, Cooke County, and downstream on
the Trinity at least to Trinidad, Henderson County. There
are further indications that a close relationship may exist
between the Carrollton and the multitudinous Waco sinker
sites enumerated by Watt’ extending the general region to
include the mid-reaches of the Trinity, Chambers Creek in
1.
1938.

Watt. Frank H., The Waeo sinker, Central Texas Archaeologist, IV. 21-70,

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Soviety

8

o,,.,.,,.,,

+. f ~

F"

5~

+++."~’~

""o.,,’,-.
___5_~ ,,,
+ <,+~~-\-,

-<+

,y

"

\

t

~ ]-

’-"""+"<:o"""+’~

.-, ,,~"
~.,,.

_

-+’""

i~ ,,,

I

Ill Co.v+,’oll’l:o,"+ Foe:.u,$ S.tes

& W

he Focus 5,’l’es

TYPE LOCALITIES
T R I N I T"/ A,5 PECT

, .(,,_,+,_,,+ :

LOC/~LE

~,J

FIGURE 1
Location of Trinity Aspect.

/

¢

X,

....

L?. .

Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon

Navarro County, Aquilla Creek in Hill and McLennan
Counties, and west to the Brazos near Waco. Likewise there
are distant, less-pronounced similarities between the Carrollton and the Yarbrough~ site in Van Zandt County, and
materials from near Lufkin in Angelina County; there are
still additional resemblances to certain features of the archaic cultures of Northwest Louisiana and Eastern Oklahoma as well. The Elam focus shows a number of similarities to archaic materials known from Lamar County and
otherwise throughout East Texas. The close ties with the
Edwards Plateau loci to the west and southwest will be selfevident in the ensuing sections. Thus the Trinity aspect
occupies Northeast Texas and possibly extends into Louisiana and Oklahoma, as will be seen in Fig. 1.
A pronounced three-terrace system is evident along the
Trinity near Dallas, and along the louver reaches of its major
tributary, the Elm Fork, northwestward. The typical vertical section of the low or first terrace (T-l), and the floodplain (T-0), is shown in Fig. 2; the first terrace is called the
Union Terminal at Dallas3 and the Carrollton on the Elm
Fork in northwest Dallas County4, the two having been
proven continuous and identical. This Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace is of complex origin, the two lowermost formations (A and B) called the Hill and Shuler, having been
definitely identified as representing the Wisconsin stage of
the Pleistocene; apparently after considerable erosion and
sloping along the stream valleys during the Altithermal
period, the two upper formations (C and D), named the
Albritton and Pattillo, were deposited on the eroded flanks
of the old terrace during early Medithermal times of the
Recent. A very late period of deposition laid down a fifth
formation (E), the Carter, in the present floodplain below.~

2. :N’ewell, H. Perry and A. D. Krieger. The George C. Davis site, Cherokee
Count’, Texas. American Antiquity Memoir No. 5, 1949.
3. Shuler, E. W. Terrace~ of the Trinity River, Dalla~ County, Texas, Field and
Laboratory, III, 44-53, 1935.
4. Pattillo, L. Gray. River terraces in the Carrollton area, Dallas County, Texas,
Field and Labor~tory, VIII, 27-32, 1940.
5. Crook, Wilson W., Jr. The floodplain and first terrace alluvial chronology of
the Trinity River.Elm Fork system, Dallas County, Texas, ms. for Field and Labor~
tory, 1952.

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

CULTURE .,%

A
T’-O

FoR

MAT’IONS
FIGURE 2

Trinity Aspect o:f the Archaic Horizon

11

The elevation of the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace
varies frora 10 feet above the floodplain along the Elm Fork
to as much as 30 feet above the bottoms on the main Trinity; both the Elm Fork and Trinity now run in intrenched
channels cut some 20 feet below the floodplain.
Without exception, the known sites of the Carrollton and
Elam foci are contained within the top two formations of
the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace, usually in a buried
condition. Almost without exception, these sites also occur
in the vicinity of a small tributary stream where it cuts
through the terrace deposits to reach the floodplain below;
many of these secondary streams are definitely intermittent
today, so~ne being totally dry washes, poorly situated for
camp sites at the present. Therefore, the age of the cultures
and the environment in which they existed are inextricably
bound up with the geology and the climatic cycles responsible for the Albritton and Pattillo formations.
The dual depositional sequence exemplified by these two
formations occupying an intermediate position between the
terminal Pleistocene and the latest deposition has been
roughly equated with the similar sequences observed in
other sections. Thus the Albritton and Pattillo are thought
to correspond with the lower and upper components of the
Calamity formation in the Big Bend6, the lower and upper
Elm Creek silts (or Nugent silts 1-4) at Abilene7, and the
lower and upper Cienega clays at Whitewater Draw, Arizona.s These two formations are interpreted as being indicative of climatic periods of greater moisture than that of very
late times, yet demonstrably younger and less than those of
the Pleistocene, yielding an assignment to the period of the
"Little Pluvial" or the Medithermal.
An estimate of "about 3,000 years ago" for the "Little
Pluvial" is common amongst geologists, and radiocarbon
6. Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell and D. Jo Lehmer. The association of
archaeological materials with geological deposlt~ In the Big Bend region o~ Texas,
Weat Texaa Historical and Scientific Society Publication, X, 1940.
Ray, Cyrus N. : Kirk Bryan ; M. M. Leighton. et at. Various publications.
7.
Antevs, Ernst. Climate and early man in North America. in Early Man by
8.
G. G. MacCurdy, 1937.

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

datings of about 4,000 years ago for materials in the Lower
Cienega, and about 2,500 years ago for others in the Upper
at Whitewater Draw, generally prove out this assumption.
On this basis and certain other comparisons, the Albritton
formation has been tentatively dated at 4,000-6,000 years
ago, and the Pattillo at 1,750-3,500 years ago. As Carrollton
focus materials have been recovered in situ in the upper
part of the Albritton, on the Albritton-Pattillo contact line,
and in the basal six inches of the Pattillo above, the period
that this focus predominated is considered to extend from
the last of Albritton times, across the intervening hiatus,
and into the first stages of Pattillo depositional times. This
is estimated as being roughly 4,000-3,000 years ago. Elam
focus materials occur in situ in the middle and upper portions of the overlying Pattillo formation, hence their span
is considered to be from 2,500 to 1,500 years ago.
Reports on the age of a Carrollton focus charcoal sample
from the base of the Pattillo at the Wheeler site have not
yet been received, but should eventually greatly clarify the
time estimates on the duration of the cultures.
The Carro~lton Focus
Two major sites, the Wheeler near the confluence of Denton Creek and the Elm Fork (See Station 3, Fig. 1) and the
Lake Dallas just below the old Lake Dallas dam (Station 1,
Fig. 1), form the type localities for the Carrollton focus.
Both are on the Elm Fork, both lie in situ at the base of the
Patillo formation in the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace,
and the two are but 10 miles apart, directly north and south
of each other. Artifact assemblages from the two sites are
practically indistinguishable from each other, and with one
possible exception, exactly duplicate each other in the various divisions.
FIGURE 2
Top: 1deal section of Trinity River terraces.
T-0, Floodplain; T-l, Union
Terrninal-Carrollton terrace; T-2, Travis School-Farmer’s Branch terrace: T.3, Love
Field-Bethel terrace,
Bottom : Ideal sections of T-0 and T-1 formations and included archaeological
mains. A, Hill formation; B, Shuler formation; C, Albrttton formation; D, Pattlllo
formation : E, Carter formation ; I, Carrollton focus ; II, Elam focus ; III, Wylie focus.

Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon

13

The Wheeler site, as previously describedg, is exposed in
the walls of a multiple gravel pit operation cut into the
Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace just south of Denton
Creek as it enters the Elm Fork floodplain. The site lies
almost precisely at the edge of the terrace where it drops
off 10 feet to the floodplain below; Denton Creek and the
Elm Fork, both some hundreds of yards away, are themselves incised below the floodplain some 20 feet, making
the total elevation of the terrace surface at the site 30 feet
above present-day stream level. At this point the Pattillo
formation is five feet thick, as usual composed of a brown,
fluvial sand; the cultural materials and occupation zone
occur definitely in si~u from the underlying Albritton-Pattillo contact line upwards for about six to eight inches,
leaving a sterile overburden of some four and a half feet
above. No human evidences whatsoever occur upon the terrace surface.
The Lake Dallas site is contained in a cut-off segment
of the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace lying between
an old abandoned channel and the present channel of the
Elm Fork, just below the old Lake Dallas dam. The geologic
sequence of formations and their individual lithic composition is almost precisely identical with that described for
Wheeler; this has been determined from two gravel pit exposures in the vicinity and from Smithsonian River Basin
Surveys test pits and trenching by the authors,m The elevation of the terrace at Lake Dallas is very similar to that
at Wheeler, although the slope toward the stream channels
is more gentle. The former cultivation of the surface Pattillo formation sands for a peanut field has created a "blowo
sand" situation in which great quantities of the sand have
been stripped away mud shifted--as evidenced by the high
banks and fresh dunes concentrated along fence lines--and
the combined removal and sifting action has exposed great
numbers of artifacts formerly buried. This would have pro9. Crook. The Wheeler site: a 3500 year-old culture in Dallas County, Texas.
Field and Laboratory, XX, 2. 43-65. 1952,
10. Harris, R. K. Ms. in preparation.

14

Texas .A~’cheo/ogical a~d Paleontological

duced an uncertain interpretation so common to such sites
had it not been for the striking identity of the geology and
archaeological materials with those found in s~t~ and undisturbed at the Wheeler site. As further convincing proof~ the
Smithsonian test pits encountered flint chips down to the
base of the Pattillo sands and even into the upper Albritton
clays beneath; test-trenching by the authors produced one
large archaic type projectile point in ~t~ in the Pattillo
sand just two inches above the Albritton-Pattillo contact
line, absolutely identical to the situation at Wheeler.
At neither site was there any indication of extinct fauna
in either the Pattillo or Albritton formations, as is true
without exception everywhere else in the Dallas region.
Indeed, animal remains were quite rare in both sites, although charred bone from hearths at the Wheeler location
yielded fragments of deer antler and several teeth of B~so~
b~so~. Also, the Wheeler site produced one fragmentary
human skull in s~t~ in the cultural zone in the basal six
inches of the Pattillo formation. This was completely decalcified but not fossilized. It is of the extremely longheaded, slab-sided, keeled-vaulted human physical type already well-known from the Abilene area, the Texas Coast,
Xral Verde County on the Rio Grande, and from the California Early Horizon, the Pericu in Lower California, and
Punin and Lagoa Santa in South America.lt It is therefore
not surprising that the other Texas remains are accompanied by or are located in regions of archaic type cultural
materials.
All materials of the Carrollton focus are lithic, no others
having seemingly survived, if originally present. Projectile
points constitute the vast majority of the artifact assemblage, and thereby need must comprise the majority of index, or distinctive, traits. Next in importance are the scrapers, particularly the "gouges" so definitive of early archaic
complexes elsewhere. Pottery is non-existent, grinding
11. MacGowan, Kenneth. What have the bones to ~ay7 in Ear]~" Man tn tho New
Work], 19~0.

PLATE 1
Carrollton focus.
Nos. 2-6, 8-9, 13-14, 16-15. 22-23, 25-27, 30 32 Wheeler Site.
Nos. 1, 10-:12. 15, 19-21, 2S.29, 31 Lake Dallas Site.
No. 7 Denton Creek Sit~*.
No.
24 Bachman’s Dam Site.
All specimens ~ size.

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Horizon

17

stones exceedingly rare, and ground stone work restricted
to sinkers, certain worked stones, and the smoothed edges
.of projectile points. Percussion chipping is the rule, with
one exception, and a most striking feature is the heavy
predominance of flintmtotally absent as a native material
in Northeast Texas!mas much as 80% in the projectile point,
knife, and borer classifications, while the local quartzite
provides the basic material for the majority of the utilitarian
implements.
Projectile points, shown in Plate I, are mainly of the
archaic types. A large variety, over 50 mm in length, constitutes almost 50% of the total (Nos. 1-4, Plate I) ; mediumsized and small points comprise an equal number, being 3550 nun, and under 35 mm in length, respectively. These are
all percussion chipped, very thick in cross-section, and with
a certain crudeness of manufacture apparent. Some are
stemmed with parallel sides and a square base (Nos. 7-9,
Plate I); some roughly-shouldered and of a version of the
Gary Contracting Stem type (Nos. 12-13, Plate I); a few
are leaf-shaped (Nos. 6, 17, Plate I); some possess basal indentions to form the stem (Nos. 10-11, and No. 22 which has
been obviously reworked to add one basal indention, Plate
I); others are slightly-shouldered or one-shouldered (Nos.
1, 14, 17, Plate I); and the smaller types most commonly
fall within the specifications of the Ellis Stemmed poinV
(Nos. 15-16, Plate I).
A constant minor percentage (about 5%) of the total projectile point assemblages from nearly all Carrollton sites
is composed of Plainview-like, unfluted-Folsom, or other
"early" types (Nos. 19-25, Plate I). These are virtually
distinguishable from those recovered in pure "early" site~
on the High Plains, yet are intermixed and plainly associated with the archaic types at these Carrollton sites. They
are marked by their excellent pressure flaking (the one
exception mentioned earlier), thinness in section, and cor~sistent grinding of the edges along the lower sides and bas~;
the familiar concave base and leaf-shape further charac~-

18

Texas Archeo~ogical and Paleontologica! Society

terize this type-all in obvious contrast with the percussionchipped, stemmed-and-shouldered, thick archaic forms.
Ground edges are also present on the stems and in the
indentions of a number of other forms (Nos. 3, 7, 9, 10, 11,
Plate I), a technique thought to be connected with Early
Man. This is almost assuredly a "carry-over" trait in the
process of disappearance-only 10% of the archaic-type
points have this feature in the Carrollton focus-which
entirely vanishes in the later complexes. Sanding of the
edges for attachment is most common in the forms with
basal indentions (Nos. 10-11 and No. 22 as reworked), but
also occurs on the parallel-sided stemmed types (Nos. 7-9)
and a few others; as mentioned previously, all the Plainview-like points exhibit this feature. In contrast to the percussion-chipped edges of the archaic points, the smoother
edges are most striking.
Drilling and boring tools fashioned from broken projectile points or fragments of broken points are another definite trait. These are often reworked from those seemingly
of the "early" variety, although some from broken archaic
points are also present. Most commonly the basal fragment
was utilized for this purpose, possibly indicating hafting.
Some of these are illustrated as Nos. 26 and 28 (reworked
archaics) and Nos. 27 and 29 (reworked early types), Plate I.
Two forms of knives are generally present. One is superior
in workmanship to the archaic percussion technique of the
projectile points, being well-flaked and fashioned, while
the other is of the rough blade-like type. Unfortunately,
most of the better types are found as fragments, but it is
possible to determine that they were usually of a leafshaped design and were not of the famous "corner-tang"
type.,2 Nos. 30-32, Plate I, are typical.
Of the scrapers, the "gouges" are by far the most common
and provide one of the real index traits of the complex.
12. Patterson, J, T. The corner-tang flint artifacts of Texas, Univer~ty of Tex~m
Bulletin, No, 8618. 1936.

Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon

21

Gouges constitute almost 60% of all scrapers at both the
Lake Dallas and Wheeler sites (some 84 specimens from the
two combined), and are always present in all other Carrollton focus sites. They are very similar to Ray’s Clear
Fork gouges13, especially the type 2 or planer-gouge (although others are present), but appear to be a smaller
version. The technique is typically piano-convex, with a
roughly-triangular form and a steeply-beveled working
edge; it is remarkable that the Carrollton gouges are almost
universally made from the same grey quartzite material.
Types are shown as Nos. 1-10, Plate II.
Side-scrapers are generally large, roughly-flaked, and
most consistently of a reddish quartzite. They present no
unique features except size. (See Nos. 11-16, Plate II.) Flakescrapers and cutting-scraping tools are also included, with
one or more sides showing secondary chipping and evidences
of use; these tend more commonly to be re-utilized flint
flakes. (Examples are Nos. 20-22, Plate II.)
A few intentionally fashioned implements which probably performed the functions of graving, spokeshaving, etc.,
are present, though quite rare. These are illustrated as Nos.
17-19, Plate II.
Hammerstones and choppers are fairly common, being
usually made from quartzite nodules. The hammerstones
display battered areas, while the choppers are very roughly
made with large, crude, percussion flaking. These are typified by Nos. 1-3, Plate III.
Worked-stone and ground-stone implements consist of
several categories. Sinker stones, identical to types depicted
as the "Waco Net Sinker" by Wattla, are made from quartzite cobbles and are present in varying numbers at nearly all
sites; 33 come from the Lake Dallas site alone. Some are
shown as Nos. 4-5-7-8, Plate III. Several worked cobbles of
quartzite, comparable in technique but not in precise form,
may represent this classification at Wheeler; this is the one
13. Ray. The Clear Fork Culture complex, Texas Arehat~logteal & Paletontologieal Society Bulletin, VIII, 1938.
14. Watt. Op, tit.

22

Te~ A~cheo~ogic~ ~nd Pa~eontologic~ ~ociet~

division in which exactly duplicating artifacts cannot be
matched from the two sites, but one Wheeler specimen is of
identical material and poorly worked upon the ends almost
identical to crude sinker forms recovered from other true
sinker sites. Two of these worked stones are Nos. 6, 9, Plate

III.
Grinding stones are quite rare, but are present. Only one
has been found at Wheeler (since previous publication),
three from Lake Dallas, out of a combined total of more
than 500 artifacts. These are one-hand size, somewhat
rectangular with shaped rounded corners, both uniface
(Wheeler) and biface (Lake Dallas), and always of sandstone. Two examples are Nos. 10-11, Plate III.
One other prominent "trait" should be included--the unusual fireburnt clay "blobs" prevalent in Carrollton sites.
Although very numerous in the cultural debris, their meaning is vague. No evidence has yet been found of wattlemarkings or finger-impressions to indicate either a connection with huts or squeezings. Most of them display a
burnt area or actually include charcoal, hence they may
be remnants of floors or hearth linings, or, simply, the
burned area where fires were built upon the formerlyexposed Albritton clay surface. Several are shown as Nos.
23-27, Plate II.
The large broken point depicted as No. 5, Plate I, is ~tot a
common type nor a trait form; only this single example has
been found (Wheeler), but its unique and unmistakable
design is of great value in correlation and for this purpose
has been illustrated.
Other, smaller, Carrollton sites are shown in Fig. 1 as
Station 2 on Denton Creek upstream from Wheeler, Station
4 below Bachman’s Dam in Dallas, Station 8 near Seagoville
in Southeast Dallas County, Station 9 on Bachelor’s Creek
in Kaufman County, and Station 10 near Trinidad in Henderson County, downstream on the Trinity--all referable
to this focus. Though few in numbers, their artifact assemblages contain practically all of the typical forms de-

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Horizon

23

scribed and their geologic conditions of occurrence are likewise quite comparable. Of interest in this respect is the
Bachman’s Dam site which lies in situ wholly within the
upper 30 inches of the Albritton clays and is thus the earliest
example of the complex known so far.
The Elam Focus
One major site, the Wood, and a nearby smaller one, the
Milton, provide the type stations for the Elam focus1~
Typologically, and in the geologic sequence of occurrence,
this complex is later than the Carrollton and is a direct
outgrowth of it, representing the continued development
in situof the same basic culture pattern (and by inference,
thereby, of the same human physical type) over a long
period of time. Although the derivation from the Carrollton
is undeniable, the differences are pronounced enough to be
recognizable as a separate entity and to deserve designation as a separate focus.
The Wood site is located adjacent to Elam Creek where
it cuts through the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace to
reach the Trinity River floodplain southeast of Dallas. (Station 5, Fig. 1) Large gravel pits at the site reveal the common first terrace stratigraphic sequence pre.viously described. The Pattillo sand formation overlies the Albritton
clay as usual, but varies in depth from as much as five feet
on the lower, eroded slopes nearest the stream valleys, to
as little as six inches on the high, unaltered portions. This
is construed as the combined result of differential deposition determined by the maximum elevation to wl~ich the
Pattillo period flooding attained, and the present-day "blowsand" stripping now going on where cultivation has affected
the higher parts of the terrace. Three fairly well separated
occupational zones are present at the site, giving a stratified
sequence. The lowermost component lies in situ at the base
of the Pattillo formation, more than four feet deep at one
exposure, and appears to be a late vestige of the Carrollton
15.
Crook. The Wood and Milton sites: ~vo ]ate archa|c occupat|on ~it~ near
Dallas, Ms. for Fle|d and La~omtor:F, 19~$.

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

focus; the

middle component comprises the Elam focus ma-

terials and is observed in situ in the middle and upper Pattillo at depths ranging from 15 to 30 inches from the surface;
a small and apparently early Wylie focus component is
found directly upon the surface.
Just a mile southeast is the Milton site, situated adjacent
to a small, unnamed, intermittent stream where it cuts
through the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace to reach
the Trinity. (Station 6, Fig. 1.) Gravel pits expose an almost
identical stratigraphic sequence as at the Wood site, with
the Pattillo formation here being two to three feet in depth.
The elevation of the terrace is the same as at the Wood
site, both lying roughly 20 to 30 feet above the floodplaim
Only the Elam focus is present at this locality, occurring
in situ at an average depth of 15 inches in the Pattillo; this
is very similar to the middle component Elam focus situation at Wood. Artifacts are few in total number, but their
striking identity with those of the Wood middle component-and here not confused by the presence of any other
materials--is confirmation of the stratigraphic separation
interpreted for the other site.
In general the Elam focus assemblage follows the characteristics of the Carrollton; definitely non-pottery and
archaic in type, entirely lithic, and with a great scarcity
of bone fragments. In this last wise, only the modern species
of bison, deer, and wild turkey can possibly be suggested
as present, and no human remains have been identified. A
number of the Carrollton traits seem to have disappeared
by Elam times, while a few new ones have been added;
certain other Carrollton traits have diminished in percentage of occurrence, while other surviving forms display a
definite diminuation in size. Very apparent is the increasing popularity of the native local quartzite as a material,
now even constituting over 50% of the projectile points
whereas in the Carrollton it provided a scant 20%. Thfi’s is
interpreted as a further removal in time from former flint
sources and an increasing adaptation to the Dallas County

8

pLATE 3

9

Tr~i~t A~pect o~ the A~eh~e Horizo~

region environment. (It is interesting to note that in the
later Wylie focus sites, flint becomes exceedingly rare!)
Again projectile points are dominant, Elam types being
shown in Plate IV. Early-type, Plainview-like, etc., points
and archaic type points with ground edges have both disappeared. The large archaic types, which constituted almost
50% of the Carrollton forms, are practically gone. In their
stead are medium-sized (35 mm to 50 mm) and small (under 35 mm) archaic types, rather evenly divided in numbers, though the medium slightly predominates. Percussion
chipping with a relatively thick cross-section is still the
rule. The technique of stemming and shouldering-or-barbing is advanced over the Carrollton with more definite features, some even foreshadowing the "cornered" type known
from the later Wylie focus; the very slightly shouldered
and leaf-like shapes are almost completely replaced. A
number of Yarbrough Stemmed points occur, this being a
type elsewhere attributed as a late archaic form in Northeast Texas (Nos. 28-31, Plate IV).
The drills made from reworked broken projectile points
are gone, and replacing them are definitely-fashioned drills
made for that sole purpose originally. Two of these are
shown as Nos. 32-33, Plate IV, with No. 32 exhibiting a
right-beveled technique.
Thick, rough, leaf-shapes become the dominante knife
form (Nos. 36-37, Plate IV), with one double-ended leafshaped specimen also known. These are all of quartzite, the
poorer flaking qualities of which perhaps accounting for the
cruder form of the implements over those of the Carrollton;
these last, as described, were mostly of flint.
Scraping and cutting flakes continue in use much as before, being still normally of flint waste materials. Two are
pictured as No~ 34-35, Plate IV. Gravers seem to be absent.
Gouges have nearly disappeared, in contrast to their predominance in the Carrollton, and the few still surviving are
greatly diminished in size, though still exhibiting the same
technique, design, and quartzite material. (Compare Nos.

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

1-3, Plate V, with Nps. 1-10, Plate II.) More important is
the new scraper form shown as Nos. 4-6, Plate V, which
now appears. This type is roughly ovate, piano-convex, and
very highly "turtle-b£cked" in form; without exception it
is made of quartzite, usually yellowish in color.
Side-scrapers retain their indeterminate form and are
quite generally indistinguishable from those of the Carrollton. (Nos. 7-9, Plate V.)
Sinker stones and worked stones no longer constitute
part of the complex, having disappeared entirely. Grinding
stones are still rare, three from the Wood site, none from
lVlilton. One is shown as No. 13 in Plate V, being unifaced
and similar to those from Carrollton and fashioned from an
iron-impregnated East Texas sandstone. Hammerstones and
choppers continue present, made from large quarzite nodules
and similar in all respects to those of the earlier focus. (Nos.
10, 14, Plate V.) The strange clay "blobs" have disappeared,
perhaps as a result of Elam sites occurring alter the Pattillo
formation had commenced its deposition and therefore no
longer being situated directly upon the clay surface of the
underlying Albritton.
The Loving site near the mouth of Prairie Creek, southeast of Milton, is another Elam focus location. Continuing
below it and shown generally as Station 7 in Fig. 1 are the
18 archaic, non-pottery sites described by Kirkland16 which
almost certainly belong to the Elam focus. These present
very similar geologic occurrences and the description and
illustration of their combined total of 460 artifacts conform
most closely in typology and percentage of importance of
the various forms.
Comparisons and Conclusions
Materials collected along Elm Creek (the beginning of the
Elm Fork of the Trinity) near Gainesville, Cooke County,
bear a suspicious resemblance to the Carrollton focus.lV
16. Kirkland, Forrest. A eerie~ of non-pottery sites in Dallas County, Text,
The Retard, Dallu County Archaeological Society, III, 6, 1942.
17. Mos~. Hubert. Personal ¢oramunication. $u]¥, 19~2.

Trinity Aspecf o] the Archaic Horizon

29

These present a seeming mixture of Plainview-like points
end large archaic types, and several hearths and burials
have been recorded at some depth in a sand formation,
possibly an extension of the Pattillo. The sinker sites in the
Waco region include identical sinkers to those of the Carrollton focus~ and an illustration of "typical projectile points
accompanying sinker sites" shows many archaic types which
can be matched almost point-for-point in the Wheeler-Lake
Dallas groups, including the illustration of one PIainview~ike point. In addition, gouges in "small numbers" are known
to occur with them. A very close relationship with the Carrollton is indicated. The Yarbrough site in Van Zandt County, just 60 miles east of Dallas beyond Kaufman County
(where one Carrollton site is known!), is famous for its
mixture of Plainview-like points and archaic points in a
non-pottery complex. This, coupled with the seeming sporadic occurrence of early-type points over Northeast Texas
and Northwest Louisiana, leads to the possibility that a
version of the Carrollton focus extends in that direction
as well.
Non-pottery levels and sites in Lamar County and elsewhere in Northeast Texas resemble the Elam focus archaic
materials of a later stage. Substantiating this late assignment are several of the early pottery cultures of the region.
It is a known fact that most of the Wylie focus’ 8 sites, shown
generally as Station 11 in Fig. I, along the East Fork of
the Trinity (Collin, Rockwall, and Kaufman Counties) seem
to be a mixture of late archaic elements with a pottery-andagricultura! complex. Generally, pottery and associated pottory culture type projectile points occur in the topmost six
inches or so of the sites, grading downward into an underlying, non-pottery, archaic zone to depths of 30 inches or
more. The archaic projectile points in the underlying zone,
as well as the remnant ones mixed with the pottery type
ones above, are very close to Elam focus types; in addition,
an occasional gouge is found on a Wylie site, and the Elam
I$. St~phenson, Robert L. The Hogge Bridge site and the Wylie focus, Amer|ca~
fi..ntiqu|ty, XXVII, 4, 19~2.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

3O

"turtle-back" ovate scrapers become common in a more
evolved and better-developed form. That the Wylie focus
represents a continuation of the Carrollton-Elam sequence,
whereby a very late manifestation of the latter became
mixed with incoming pottery culture traits, is strongly
suggested. The Wood site with its three components may
well represent the entire sequence in stratigraphic succession.
The Alto focus ~ in its lowest level appears to represent
somewhat the same mixture of late archaic with new pottery culture elements. Some of its materials may indicate
an evolvement out of a late archaic similar in a number
of respects to the Elam focus.
On the basis of pottery types in the Wylie focus attributed
to trade-contact, an age of between 1,000 and 500 years ago
may be postulated, carbon dating of early Alto focus corn
gives an age of roughly 1,500 years ago. Thus it would
appear that Elam focus traits survived beyond the conclusion of the Pattillo depositional period (estimated 1,750
years ago), and sometime in the hiatus before the Carter
deposition began (ca. 650 years ago), became mixed with
arriving pottery elements---doubtlessly, at varying times in
different areas. It is considered that this time of mixture
terminates the Elam focus, and thereby the Trinity aspect
of the archaic.
At the other end of the occupational span, the Plainviewlike points and the archaic points with ground edges indicate
some sort of "carry-over" or very late contact between the
early archaic and the Early Man hunting cultures. The projectile points are n~uch too consistent in all sites to be the
result of fortuitous collecting from earlier sites, they are
much too differently made to be a variant archaic form, and
as mentioned before are practically indistinguishable from
those at ~ue sites. Possibly the early cultures lingered on
into archaic times; the earliest archaic people may have
intermixed with late remnants somewhere in their migra19.

Newell and Krieger, Op. ~|t.

PLATE

5.7.

12.

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Hor~zon

33

tions, gradually absorbing them entirely; or the dessication
of the Altithermal may have driven the last early survivors
down off of the High Plains along the river courses, where
they encountered the early archaics already in occupation.
It places an interesting speculation upon the beginning of
the archaic and the termination of the early hunting cultures.
Correlations are possible between the Trinity aspect and
other archaic materials in Texas, as well as with archaic
cultures outside the state. In general, the Edwards Plateau
and Big Bend aspects give evidence of long-continued occupation of the same basic cultural type, gradually developing
and changing in situ; both possess numerous examples of
being buried in formations of some considerable geologic
antiquity, though inevitably referable to the early Medithermal or "Little Pluvial" period rather than ~the Pleistocene, and none has as yet presented a proven association
with extinct fauna. In all these respects, they are comparable to the Trinity aspect.
Specifically, the Merrill site2o on Brushy Creek near
Round Rock, Williamson County, contained a number of
similarities to the Carrollton focus--important, as this is
the type station of the Round Rock focus. There, materials
occurred deeply buried in the first terrace in a four-segment
sequence: top, a surface midden with late artifacts; next
below, a four-and-a-h~lf foot gravel layer with earlier archaic materials; then a two foot midden with earlier archaic
artifacts; and beneath that, a six foot silt layer with earlier
archaic types. The lower three zones are considered a mixture of Round Rock and Clear Fork loci by the investigators,
with a large time gap between them and the surface midden;
suggested dating has been "either 6,000 or 4,000 years ago"
for the louver portions, about A. D. 1500 for the surface
midden. As no extinct fauna occurred in the formations,
the geologic structdre seems roughly comparable to the
Dallas sequence, with the gravel corresponding to the Pattillo and the underlying silt to the AlbrittonMthus placing
20.
Campbell. The Merrill site: archaeological remains associated with alluvial
terrace deposits, Texas Archaeological & Paleontological Society Bulletin, XVIII, 1948.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

34

the buried midden in the equivalent to the Albritton-Pattillo hiatus. The Carrollton focus has been shown to extend
in time from the upper Albritton, across the hiatus, into
the lower Pattillo, with the Wheeler site occupation seemingly coeval with the Merrill buried midden and the lower
portion of the overlying gravel. Hence, it is no surprise to
see ix the Merrill site illustrations straight-sided, squarebased, stemmed points very close to Nos. 7-9, Plate I; a
"Yuma-like" point somewhat similar to Nos. 19-23, Plate I;
two gouges similar in technique, though larger, to those on
Plate II; and another of those remarkable points like No. 5,
Plate I. Significantly, these are all from the buried midden
or in the overlying gravel as though washed in from it.
Thus a rough contemporaneity can be assumed between the
Carrollton fgcus and the lower portions of the Merrill site.
Additionally, Watt observes that "sinkers are reported
from the middle level of the Burnt Rock Mounds of Central
Texas"--the term "Burnt Rock’’21 being the common name
for that phase of the archaic before the Round Rock focus
was so designated. However, no sinkers were found at the
Merrill site, the Round Rock type site.
The Carrollton gouges are a smaller, quartzite version of
the larger flint ones of the other early Edwards Plateau
aspect focus, the Clear Fork of the Abilene region--hence
an implied relationship here, along with some projectile
point similarities. As the Round Rock and Clear Fork loci
have been recorded as mixed both at the Merrill site and
in Jackson’s deep site22 on the Colorado River above Austin
in Travis County, the two are regarded as contemporaneous,
and thus the logical interlocking affinities with both as seen
in the Carrollton ma~terials. Incidentally, both of these Edwards Plateau complexes also exhibit a few grinding stones
and many choppers, in general comparable to the Carrollton.
Not much comparison exists between the Carrollton and the

21.
Pearce. J. E. Present .tatus of Tex~ arehae~lo~, Texas /~rcha~alaa,ical &
Pal¢on~o~cal Society Bullet,n, 1V, 1932.

22.

Jackson. A. T. A d~p areha~logieal

Arc~logical & Pal~ntolo~cai ~iety Bnlle~, XI, 1939.

9

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Horizon

37

loci of the Big Bend aspect, other than roughly equivalent
geologic position throughout the Medithermal or "Little
Pluvial" depositions; however, other authors have recognized similarities between the Big Bend and Edwards Plateau manifestations, gouges are known from along the Pecos
River sites, and a type of sinker has been found in Val Verde
County. As mentioned previously, the long-headed, slabsided, keeled-vaulted human type is most prominently
known from the Abilene and Val Verde areas as a further
comparison.
Certain of the projectile point forms in the Grove focus23
(archaic) of Oklahoma show similarity to those of the Carrollton; especially noteworthy is the appearance of Plainview-like points as well in the Middle Grove. However, no
gouges or sinkers are present24. Further afiel~l, a number of
the Carrollton point types resemble those of the Borax
Lake-Pinto Basin-Silver Lake-Lake Mojave desert cultures
of California.25 Nos. 7-9, Plate I, especially resemble Borax
Lake points according to Harrington.26 The general geologic assignment of these cultures and estimated datings now
conform roughly with the early archaic. A vague resemblance in several categories can also be noted with some
of the Eastern archaic, manifestations.27
As for the Elam focus, Kirkland observed~e that the materials from his 18 non-pottery sites, now incorporated as
Elam, "resemble those from the middle and upper levels of
the Burnt Rock Mounds." In this, the authors concur, the
artifacts being obviously derived from the earlier Carrollton and developed from it at a later period quite in line
with the observed long-continued evolution in the various
Edwards Plateau sites. The Elam ovate "turtle-back" scrap23.
Bell, Robert E. and David A. Baerrets. A survey of Oklahoma archaeology,
Texas Archaeological & Paleontological Society Bulletin, XXII.
Ibid. Persoaa] communication, April. 1952.
24.
25. Harrington, M. R.; Elizabeth W. Crozier and William H. Campbell; Malcolm
$. Rogers, et al. Various publications.
26.
Harrington. Personal communications. May, 1952.
27.
Rttchie. ~V. A. Ne*v evidence relating to the archaic occupation of New
York, Researches and Transactions of the New York State Archaeological Association,
VIII, 1, 1936~
28.
Ktrkland. Op. ell

Te~ A~cheo~ogie~l a~d Pal~o~tolog~cal Society

ers bear a marked similarity to those shown as typical of
the Early Woodland of Oklahoma (which follows the Grove
archaic), while the point types more closely match, in some
instances, those of the late Grove focus--again in line with
the observed sequences.
In time, though not in typology, the Carrollton focus
roughly equates with the Chiricuahua, and the Elam focus
with the San Pedro, of the Cochise culture of Arizona; likewise with the corresponding elements at Ventana Cave.Zg, 3o
Actually, the archaic of Texas appears to have arrived
perhaps as far back as the Altithermal (6,000-8,000 years
ago), certainly by the beginning of the Medithermal depositions as demonstrated in so many sites. The earliest manifestations of it, especially in the Edwards Plateau region,
show a very heavy flint industry with exceptionally large
average projectile point and gouge-and-scraper forms; this
is true also of the early Grove in Oklahoma. If the geologic
interpretation of the Dallas area is correct, the archaic arrived here--still in the early Medlthermal--but somewhat
after its beginning; therefore the Carrollton focus should
be slightly later than the very earliest Round Rock-Clear
Fork (and Maravillas in the Big Bend, and possibly the
early Grove), and the artifact typology bears this out with
a number of smaller forms. Thus if one would arbitrazily
divide these other complexes into an Early-Middle-Late
classification, the Carrollton would conform more closely
to the NIiddle division and the Elam to the Upper--not
precise, but a fairly workable comparison.
The establishment of the Trinity aspect does much to
fill in a gap in the Northeast Texas chronology which has
long proven a hindrance in the understanding of many other
problems in this region.
Dallas, Texas
August 13, 1952
29. Antevs. Op. ett.
30. Haury, Emil W. The stratigraphy of Ventana Cave, Arizona, American Antiquity, VIII, 3, 1943.

THE KENT-CRANE SITE: A SHELL MIDDEN
ON THE TEXAS COAST
T. N. CA~BF~L~.
In a previous volume of this bulletin’ I published a report
on the Johnson site, which was designated as the type site
for the Aransas focus of the Texas coast. That report also
included a brief summary of the Aransas focus based upon
the excavation of the Johnson site and two additional sites
on Live Oak Peninsula, the Live Oak Point site and the KentCrane site. The purpose of the following paper is to present
an analysis of the arehaelogical materials from the KentCrane site and to show the place of this site ir~ the current
conception of the Aransas focus.
SAte Location and Description
The Kent-Crane site, an extensive shell midden, lies on
the west side of Live Oak Peninsula. about five miles north
of Rockport, Aransas County, Texas (Fig. 3, B). Live Oak
Peninsula, which extends northward between Copano Bay
and Aransas Bay, is in the middle section of the Texas coast.
This locality is a part of what is known to physiographers as
the Coastal Prairie.2 The terrain of the Coastal Prairie is
very flat and in places marshy. As the name implies, it is
predominantly grassland; but there are local areas of woodland, notably along stream courses and on sandy ridges.
Live Oak Peninsula is a sandy wooded area, being covered
with a chaparral or thorny brush vegetation, but there is
evidence which indicates that in aboriginal times Live Oak
Peninsula was a grass-covered prairie. Within the past
hundred years chaparral vegetation has moved northward
and eastward along the Texas coast,3 and Price and Gunter4 have presented historical evidence which shows that as
1.
2.
3.
4.

Campbell, 1947.
Fenneman, 1938, Pl~. 100-120.
That,, 1939, p. 8.
Price and Gt~nter, 1943. pp. 12-13 ; Gunter. 1950. pp. 366-367.

FIGURE 3
Kent-Crane Site. Texas Coast.
A, cross-section of midden deposit; B. mal~
showing location of Kent-Crane Site and other excavated sit~ on Live Oak Peninaula0
Arnns~ County, Texa~.

I<’tENT~A~N~
~OSS ,,~ECTION

$lTC~

The Kent-Crane Site

41

late as 1870 the entire Aransas Bay coast line was truly a
prairie.
The climate of the Aransas Bay area has certain unfavorable aspects from the point of view of human occupation
under aboriginal conditions. Temperatures are mesothermal, but precipitation is unreliable. Little rainfall occurs
in winter, limiting the surface water supply during that
season; and in some years rainfall is so deficient that such
years may be classified by climatologists as desert years.~
The Kent-Crane midden forms a low ridge that closely
parallels the beach of Copano Bay for some 600 meters. It
is 20 to 30 meters wide and varies in thickness from a few
centimeters to a maximum of approximately 1.8 meters.
The greater part of the deposit, however, appears to vary
between .9 and 1.2 meters. It rests on a bed of clay, PrObably the Beaumont formation, which attains an elevation of
about 1 meter above mean high tide (Fig. 3, A).e In certain places wave action has exposed the midden deposit in
vertical section, and here artifacts and shell from the midden
litter the beach. No record exists of disturbance by cultivation, but a drainage ditch is said to have been cut through
the midden about the year 1922. Today the midden is
covered by a dense thicket composed of shrubs and smalI
trees, the latter principally oak.
Excavation
This site was visited by George C. Martin and Wendell
Potter in their archaeological survey of the Rockport area
in 1927-1929.7 On April 13, 1930, Martin and Potter made a
test excavation at one of the vertical sections facing Copane
Bay. They dug a strip 15 feet wide some 3 feet back into
the midden, at which place they found the deposit to exceed.
1.2 meters in thickness.
During the period of January 2 to March 29, 1941, a Uni5. Russell, 1945, pp. 43, 46-47.
6. At one locality a bed of fossil oyster and clam shells is exposed in section,,
showing it to be included in the clay formation. There is no evidence which sugge~tz;
that man had anything to do with its origin.

7.

~dartln, n. d., p. 6, Site

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

42

versity

of

Texas-Works

Progress

Administration

field

party,e under the direction of William A. Duffen, extensively
tested the Kent-Crane site.

Near the central part of the

long midden a trench 100 feet (30.47 meters) wide was carried from the beach directly across the site, a distance of 75
feet (22.85 meters). Some 275 meters to the north a trench
45 feet (13.71 meters) wide was similarly excavated for a
distance of 20 feet (6.09 meters) into the midden deposit.
Finally, a short distance south of the main excavation a
test block 10 feet (3.04 meters) square was removed at a
point lying on the longitudinal axis of the midden.
Shortly after excavation began it became apparent that
there was a stratigraphic break in the midden deposit. Two
distinct layers could be traced on any given profile (Fig.
3, ’A). Stratum 1, the lower, rested on basal clay and was
black, ashy, and rather compact. In the main excavation
near the center of the midden Stratum 1 averaged between
60 and 75 centimeters in thickness. Stratum 2, the upper
layer, contrasted with Stratum 1 in both texture and color.
It was loose and quite brownish. S~atum 2 was not represented everywhere in the areas excavated, being notably
thin or absent in the eastern part. Near the central part,
however, it showed a thickness that varied from 30 to 45
centimeters. Roughly speaking, Stratum 1 comprised the
lower two-thirds of the deposit, Stratum 2 the upper onethird. The clay base upon which the midden rested had a
surface that was relatively flat, very few irregularities being
observed.
In the main excavation the artifacts were segregated into
three groups based on their vertical distribution.
In
Stratum 1 the artifacts from the lower half (Stratum la)
were separated from those in the upper half (Stratum lb);
and those from Stratum 2 were kept separate from the
others. In the two smaller excavations to the north and
8.
known
Estate,
by Mr.

Work Project No. 16770. In the files at the University of Texas this site is
as 72D9o13. The land upon which the site lies belongs to the Kent and Crane
whence the hyl~henated name Kent-Crane. Permission to excavate wa~ given
William Kent of San Francisco, California.

The Kent-Crane Site

43

south the vertical position of each artifact in its layer was
recorded.
Contents of the Midden
Excavation revealed that the midden was composed principally of marine shells and soi!, with the former predominating. The shells were rather densely packed, and the soil
filled the interstices between the shells and shell fragments.
There was no evidence of alternating shell and soil layers.
In addition to shells, which were mainly conch (Busycon
perversum Say and Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) oyster
(Ostrea virginica Gmelin), and clam (Macrocallista nimbosa Solander),9 there was also a liberal sprinklin of
animal bones, identifiable bones and fragments indicating
fish, birds, such mammals as deer and peccary, and one
reptile, a turtle,m Scattered rather uniformly throughout
the midden deposits were artifacts of shell, bone, and stone,
as well as small fragments of asphalt; and near the surface,
as well as on it, were a few potsherds. Badly disturbed
remains of at least two burials were also included. A few
fossil bone fragments were mixed with the midden debris,
evidently having been collected by the inhabitants of the
site. T ~
Bu~a~
Martin~2 reports .that a human skeleton was found at the
Kent-Crane site in 1922, apparently during or shortly after
the time when the drainage ditch was cut through the midden. He estimates that the bones came from a depth of
approximately 30 centimeters, but he gives no data concerning the type of burial. Martin also reports the occurrence
of a human skull fragment containing three teeth that seems
9.
No sample collection of shells from the Kent-Crane site was made. The species
listed here are those indicated by sbell~ t;s~.~i in the manufactur~ of artifacts. The
identifications were made by Mr. Richard W, Fo~ter, A~sistant Curator of Mollusks,

Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvar~l University. At the nearby Johnson site
(Campbell, 1947, p. 45) a sample c~lleetion of shells was made which gives nn indication of the shellfish f~rms used for food hy the people responsible for the two middens.
10. Th~e identlfi~tJons were mnde in the field by W. A. Duffen,
11. Thee fragments were examined by Dr. A. S. Romer, D~rector of the Museum
of ~mparat~ve Z~logy, IIarvard University,. One is the ~th of a fossil
~ne or la~r) one i~ po~ibly a tulle bone, and the three remaining fragmen~ are
unidentlfiable.
12. Martin. n. d., p. 6,

to have come from near the base of his excavation, some 15
centimeters above the clay layer at the bottom of the midden. He states specifically that it was not part of a burial.
In Duffen’s main excavation a disturbed burial was encountered at the base of the midden. It rested on the surface of the clay stratum and was 50 centimeters below the
midden surface at that point. Portions of the lower half
of the skeleton remained, consisting of a part of the pelvis,
all of the right leg bones, and the lower half of the left leg.
There seemed to be a north-south orientation of these bones,
the pelvis being to the north. Lying near the left knee was
the clam shell scraper shown in Plate 6, L.
This information is too scant to permit us to make a
statement about the burial customs of the inhabitants of
the Kent-Crane site. All that can be said is that some
burials were placed in the midden deposit.
Description o:~ the Ar~:facts
A total of 689 objects showing human handiwork was obtained during the course of Duffen’s excavation.13 Of this
number only 596 are complete enough to be identified and
included in the various categories of a trait list. Omitting
the potsherds, which are very few in number, and also the
lumps of asphalt showing impressions of basketry mud matting, all of these objects are made from three classes of
material--shell, bone, and stone.
Percentages of these
materials run approximately as follows: shell 31%, bone
33%, and stone 36%.,
Before proceeding with a description of these artifacts,
a brief preview of the conclusions will be presented. This
will help to give perspective to the descriptive material that
follows. Materials from two cultures are represented at the
Kent-Crane site, namely, the Aransas focus and the Rockport focus. The Aransas material is stratigraphically overlain by the Rockport material, which is scant in nature and
consists of the potsherds and two small arrowpoints, all of
13. The few objects collected from the site by Martin and Potter have not been
examined and thus do not enter into the frequency figures given in this section.

PLATE 6

Shell
arti,~a:e;t~- -~rom
’

Kent-Crane Site. Texas
’

e~[

strainer.

Coast.

A’ I

artifact;

J-K’

The Ke~-Cra~e ~ite

47

which occur near or on the surface of the shell midden. In
effect, we almost have a pure site of the Aransas focus,
which is the main pre-pottery horizon in this section of
the Texas coast.
SHELL OBJECTS. The shell objects, 175 in number, are
made from three kinds of shell---conch, oyster, and clam.
Objects made from conch shell predominate (88%), and consist principally of cutting, scraping, piercing, and percussion tools made either from the body whorl or the columella. No clearly identifiable ornaments of conch shell are
included. Oyster shells were perforated and probably used
for digging tools, and clam shells were occasionally used for
cutting or scraping purposes.
Conch Shell Adzes.
In Stratum 1 occurred fifty-four
adzes made from conch body whorls. Twenty-four of these
came from Stratum la, thirty from Stratum lb. Many of
these are now damaged in some way, but all bear the
characteristic ground cutting edge. As far as it is possible
to tell, and it is possible in most cases, these adzes were
made from one species of conch, Busycon perversum Say.
The large body whorl was always utilized, and there was
a. general tendency to select large conchs with thick shells.
All of these tools show the marked natural curvature of the
shell.
Adzes in various stages of completion were found, and
these indicate the steps taken in the manufacture of an adze.
First a large, roughly triangular body-whorl fragment was
removed from the conch shell and then trimmed to a general
rectangular form, usually leaving the thick body-whorl
angle. It was possible, in forty-six out of fifty-four cases,
to determine that the ground edge was formed at the anterior end of the shell fragment.,~ Thus the longitudinal axis
of the adze corresponds to the longitudinal axis of the
original shell, and the cutting edge of the adze was made
at right angles to this axis. The lateral edges of these adzes
14.

By anterior is meant the anterior part of the shell, or that end of the shell

which point~ in the normal direction of movement of the living conch. This is the

narrow or pointc~i end of the shell.

48

Texas A~cheologica! and Paleontological Society

show little evidence of having been ground. Instead they
are roughly finished, apparently by percussion, and only
in rare instances do they show any traces of smoothing.
There is no evidence of cutting or sawing of the shell in
order to remove and shape the whorl sections. It looks as
though they were broken off in some way and then roughly
shaped by percussion.
The cutting edge invariably shows strong beveling on the
inner or concave face of the sheR (Plate 6, A-F). In addition it was customary to grind the opposite or convex face
just enough to give a smoothly convex cutting edge. In
forty of the fifty-four adzes this exterior grinding of the

cutting edge is clearly visible. That the adzes were halted
or used with the convex surface or face of the shell outward
is suggested by the minor fracture scars along the cutting
edge. In almost all cases where fracturing of this sort has
occurred it has taken place on the convex face of the
cutting edge.
Plate 6, A-F, shows some of the variations in size and
outline of these shell adzes. The smallest (Plate 6,
occur in Stratum la, but large ones are present there also.
In shape little stratigraphic segregation is ascertainable.
The general rectanglar form is most common (Plate 6, A, D),
but a few (six instances) show a cutting edge that is somewhat wider than the opposite end, giving a trianguloid appearance (Plate 6, C). Sometimes the cutting edge is
ground closer to the canal of the conch shell, in which case
it has a strongly convex outline (Plate 6, E). In two
specimens both ends of the adze are ground to a cutting
edge (Plate 6, F).
The smallest adze in the series has a width of 5.6 centimeters and a length of 8.6 centimeters; the largest a width
of 8.1 centimeters and a length of 17.5 centimeters. The
common variations in proportions of length and breadth are
suggested by Plate 6, A-F. Thickness varies with the age
and size of the conch utilized. For the series in Stratum 1
it averages between 4 and 5 millimeters.
In addition to the adzes there are nine conch whorl frag-

The Kent-Crane Site

49

merits which have irregular outlines and appear to have
been struck from the original shell, nothing further having
been done to them. These are larger than most of the adzes
in the series, and it would have been a comparatively simple
matter to continue the work and fashion them into adzes.
Two of these occur in Stratum la and seven in lb.

With these should be considered five adze blanks (one
in Stratum la, four in Stratum Ib) that are complete in every
respect except that the cutting edges have not been provided. The outlines are duplicated in the series of completed adzes. Finally, there are thirteen whorl fragments
(four in Stratum la, nine in Stratum lb) which seem to be
parts of broken adzes, for they have the appropriate sizes
and outlines for adzes and are broken cleanly across between the mid-section and the cutting edge. None of these
bears a beveled cutting edge.
In Stratum 2 only five shell adzes are represented, and
all of these are fragments. They differ in no respect from
those of Stratum 1. The cutting edges are heavily ground
on the inner sides and lightly ground on the outer. It is
evident that the conch shell adze tradition fades out in this
horizon, but no comparable cutting tool replaces it. This
layer also contained three shell fragments that could be poll
ends of adzes.
Four shell adzes and one shell fragment of what was probably an adze were collected from the beach at the KentCrane site. These had evidently eroded from that portion
of the site nearest the beach. They duplicate forms from
the excavation.
Conch Columella Gouges. Forty-seven gouges, made from
the colume!lae of large, heavy conch shells, came from
Stratum 1, twenty-nine from la and eighteen from lb.
Twenty-one were made from the columellae of FascioIaria
papillosa Sowerby (Plate 7, D; note the spiral fluting which
is characteristic of this species of conch), and twenty-six
were made from columellae of Busycon perversum Say
(Plate 7, A, C). These gouges were made by removing the

50

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological

Society

body whorl and spire of the conch and then grinding the
anterior or canal end of the columella to a chisel-like edge
(Plate 7, D, gives two views of this cutting edge).

The

cutting edge is always obliquely ground on the side which
bears the canal, so that the facet extends backward on both
sides of the canal and has a general U shape. In most cases
the opposite face is lightly ground to give the cutting edge a
smoothly convex outline.

The ragged whorl margin that

spirals up the columella is commonly ground a little to
give a certain amount of smoothness, suggesting that this
tool was probably not halted but used in the hand.
Most of the gouges are heavy and have broad cutting
edges (Plate 7, D), but they vary from this toward a narrower edge (Plate 7, C), a few being almost pointed.

Only

one has any appreciable portion of the whorl still attached
(Plate 7, A), and the broad poll end of this particular gouge
is neatly finished and slightly ground to give smoothness.
These gouges vary considerably in length, but many are
now rather short, evidently because they were broken while
in use. The longest complete specimen is 15.1 centimeters.
A few show a certain amount of battering or damage to the
cutting edge.
In Stratum 2 only four gouges occur, all broken transversely. They duplicate those from Stratum 1 in every particular; in fact, they may have originally come from Stratum
1, the later occupants of the site having collected them. Like
the conch shell adzes described in the preceding section, the
conch columella gouges also fade out in Stratum 2; and no
comparable cutting tool takes the place of this tool type.
Conch Shell Hammers. In his field report Duffen mentions that the Conch shell hammers came only from the lower
part of the deposit, but no specimens are included in the
collection obtained from the Kent-Crane site. Presumably
they are of the same sort as those found at the Johnson site,
which is placed in the same focus as the Kent-Cane site. All

PLATE 7

Shell,

bone, gotlges:
and stone
artifacts
from awl;
Kent-Crane
Te~,-s Coast.
conch colt~mel|a
B, conch
columella
E-J, M. Site,
Q-S, l~ne ~twl~; K, ~patulate
~ne obj~t; L. ~ne pin ; ~. antler ~laking t~l ; O-P. ~dlng stones.

The Kent-Crane Site

53

we can do here is record the presence of conch shell
hammers, t ~
Conch CoIumella Awls. Only one of these is represented
(Plate 7, B), a small columella (length 8.7 centimeters) with
the anterior end ground to a strong, relatively sharp point.
This was found in Stratum la. One large beach-rolled columella from Stratum lb may have served as an awl, but it
shows no traces of having been ground to a point by human
hand.
Conch Shell Scrapers. Five scrapers made from the lip portion of the conch body whorl occur in Stratum 1, four from
la and one from lb. In each specimen the lip shows signs
of heavy usage in the form of chipping and abrasion. Two
of these are made from light, thin-walled conch shells, one
from a very thick, heavy-walled whorl, and two are intermediate between these two extremes. The scraper illustrated in Plate 6, H, is the largest in this small series of
scrapers, having a width of 8.5 centimeters and a length of 12
centimeters.
Conch Shell Discs. Two small discs made from the whorl
of the conch were found in Stratum 1 (one each from la
and lb). A third disc was collected from the beach adjacent to the midden. In each of these specimens the circumference has been ground to a somewhat smooth and
rounded edge. The smallest has a diameter of 6.5 centimeters, the largest a diameter of 7.8 centimeters. There is
no indication of perforations or surface decoration, such as
might be expected in a gorget. The disc illustrated in Plate
6, G, has much more curvature than the remaining two and
could have been used very well as an eating implement.
Unfinished Conch Shell Object. One well-worked fragment of an unidentified conch shell object was found in
Stratum lb (Plate 6, I). Originally it seems to have had a
lance01ate form, and its present maximum width is 3.5 centimeters. On its concave surface are four conical pits, two
large and two small, which are roughly aligned and which
15.

See Campbell. 1947. pp. $1-52, for description of the c~nch ~hell hammer.

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

54

evidently represent attempts to drill holes through the wall.
The largest of the four pits reached a point about two-thirds
through the wall. The edges of this object are ground down
to a smoothly rounded form.
Clam Shell Scraper or Kni]e. Associated with the burial
at the base of the midden was a clam shell scraper or knife
(Plate 6, L). A portion of the outer margin has been
roughly chipped to a slightly concave edge. The clam has
been identified as Macrocall~ta nimbosa Solander.
Per]orated Oyster Shells. Stratum la produced twenty
perforated oyster shells (Ostrea virg~nica Gmelin) ; none was
found in the layers above. The perforations (Plate 6, J-K)
vary from small and rounded to large and roughly oval, a
few being quadrangular. These holes are located at or near
the highest point of the shell, and the edges of the holes are
quite rough. Apparently the hole was made by a series of
sharp blows on the convex face of the shell. The shells
selected for this treatment range from 9.2 to 14.4 centimeters
in length. It is difficult to decide whether or not the shell
margins show signs of wear or use, for all are eroded to a
considerable degree. Martin~6 states that he found perforated oyster shells on the surface at this site. They are
described as "pierced with a single hole, sometimes round,
sometimes square," and are stated to be fairly numerous.
Disc-shaped Beads. Duffen’s excavation revealed no ornaments of this type, but MartinIv reports and illustrates a
disc-shaped bead of shell. It is described as having a diameter of 1.3 centimeters, and the illustration shows it to have
a small hole through the center. It was found on the beach
at the extreme southern edge of the site.
BONE OBJECTS.
The bone artifacts from the KentCrane shell midden number 193 and, so far as it is possible
to tell, were made from the bones of birds and mammals,
particularly the deer. Mammal bones were used principally
for awls and pins, and bird bones bulked large in the making
16.
17.

Martin, ibldo$ 1929, p. 54 and plate or.posite.
Martin. n. ~t., p. 6.

The Kent.Crane Site

55

of beads. Aside from pottery, which is not considered to
belong to the major cultural complex at this site, bone objects constitute the only medium of artistic expression. Some
bone awls, pins, and beads bear incised and drilled designs
of a simple geometric character.
Awls.
These are fairly numerous among the artifacts
made from bone at this site. They number fifty-four and
are made principally from mammal bones.
The most
popular type is an awl made from a deer ulna, but running
it a close second is an awl made from split bone. The bone
splinter awl runs a poor third. One awl appears to have
been made from a deer mandible, and another was made
from an unsplit bird bone shaft. This assemblage of awls
is described below.
Twenty-nine deer ulna awls are present in the collection,
twenty-one from Stratum la and eight from Stratum lb.
Ten of these are represented by distal fragrnents of sufficent length to permit fairly accurate identification. In general these awls are short but have a very thin sharp point
(Plate 7, R-S). The shortest complete awl is 9.5 centimeters
in length, the longest 11.2 centimeters.
From Stratum la came a fragment of what appears to be
an awl made from a deer mandible. Although damaged at
both ends, the presumed distal end bears a glossy polish
(Plate 7, Q).
Seventeen awls of split mammal bone are included in the
series of awls. The mammal is probably deer in all cases.
These awls are all confined to Stratum 1, nine coming from
la, eight from lb. One awl is a deer metapodial which has
been split through the middle of the articular head and on
through the shaft (Plate 7, E). This awl is the longest (16.6
centimeters) in the whole series; it has a groove encircling
the shaft near the articular head, and it is also well ground
and polished along the shaft edges and near the point.
Another awl is made from the proxiraal end of a small deer
femur (Plate 7, I). Five awls consist of long slivers split
upward from the distal articular surface of a deer metapodial
(Plate 7, J). The surfaces are smoothly ground and polished.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

56

All of these were damaged in some way, and the longest
~ragment, apparently about 80% complete, measures 12.6
centimeters. Four awls were made from deer metapodial
shafts (Plate 7, H: Plate 8, Q), but all have been broken
near the mid-section. With one exception the points are
broad and somewhat blunt. Another awl in this group is
polished over its entire surface and has a small notch in its
base (Plate 7, M).
Six split bone awl fragments are unique in that they are
decorated. They were evidently made from split shafts of
mammal long bones. Ir~ five of these the shaft slivers were
first ground down so that the implements had a flatly oval
cross section; then they were highly polished and decorated
on both flat surfaces. Of these decorated awls three are
rather similar in that hatching and crosshatching are used
to isolate undecorated triangular areas (Plate 8, T-V). One
has what appears to be a zigzag design formed by small
shallowly drilled pits (Plate 8, Y). One (Plate 8, Q) bears
a series of short parallel incised lines, as well as what appears to be the beginning of a zigzag design. Finally, there
is one awl fragment which is crudely hatched on both flat
surfaces (Plate 8, W). These lines tend to be clustered in
groups of three.
Martin,s reports and illustrates two split bone awls from
the Kent-Crane site. Both were found in his test excavation, one coming from a depth of 60 centimeters, the other
from about 15 centimeters above the clay base of the midden.
Judging from these depth figures, Martin’s awls came from
our Stratum 1. They have lengths of 7.1 and 8 centimeters
respectively.
Six awls were made from splinters of long bone shafts
(one from Stratum la, five from lb). One of these is
apparently made from bird bone, but the others are made
from mammal bones (Plate 7,. F-G). Only the points of
these awls show grinding and polishing. They vary in
length from 4 to 8.7 centimeters.

18.

Martin, n. d., p. 6; 1229, p. 57 and plate opposite.

C

B

L

J

H

M

N

T

O

U

PLATE 8
Bone artifacls,
Coast.

pottery, and evidences of basketry

from

Kent-Crane Site, Texas

A-P. bone I~,ads; Q-W. Y-BIL bone awls and pins; CC-DD.

incised bone

ments; X, [~]]~]-JJ, NN-RR, potsherd,~: KK-MM. ba~ketry teehnique~ deriw~l from
preasions in a~pha]t.

In

i~ttery rim profiles vessel interiors are to the left.

The Kent-Crane Site

One awl from Stratum lb was made from a small unsplit
bird bone shaft (Plate 8, BB). The point was formed by
grinding the end of the shaft obliquely.
Pins. In Stratum 1 were fifteen fragments of what
appear to have been long, slender, rod-like implements,
pointed at one end and possibly both ends. These are here
called pins to distinguish them from the awl fragments
described above. They differ from the awl fragments only
in being narrower and less flatly oval in cross section, and
in one specimen there is evidence which suggests that it was
pointed at both ends. Eleven of these pins are undecorated,
but four are decorated in the same techniques and designs
(with one exception) as the awls that have just been
described.
The decorated fragments (seven from Stratum la, four
from lb) include only one which is relatively coraplete
(Plate 7, L), and this specimen shows tapering at both
ends, suggesting that some or even possibly all of these
pins were originally pointed at both ends. Seven fragments
are pointed tips only (Plate 8, AA), and three are medial
fragments. An additional fragment has a bluntly rounded
point, perhaps indicating that one end sometimes may not
have been so sharp as the other. In cross section these
undecorated pins vary from oval to round, and they have
evidently been made from the split shafts of mammal long
bones. All are smoothly ground, and several even have a
glossy polish. It is impossible at present to say how long
these pins were originally, but the most nearly complete
specimen has a present length of 13.2 centimeters.
The four decorated pin fragments (two each from Stratum
la and lb) have incised and drilled designs. They are flatly
oval in cross section and are decorated on only one of the
two flat surfaces. The designs are simple, consisting of zigzag lines (Plate 8, R-S) in three specimens; the fourth is
decorated with a series of small, closely spaced drilled pits
forming a lozenge pattern (Plate 9, Z).
Spatulate Bone Objects. Two bone fragments are much
like the pins except that they have parallel sides, are much

6O

Texas A~’cheological and Paleontological Society

flatter in cross section, and have thin, spatulate ends (Plate
7, K). It is quite likely that their missing opposite ends
were pointed and that they should be included with the
pins or awls.
Tubular Beads. Among the various bone objects from the
Kent-Crane site tubular beads are the most numerous.
Eighty such beads were found, of which sixty-seven were
undecorated and thirteen decorated with incised designs.
Of the undecorated beads, twenty-three are from Stratum
la, forty-three from lb, and one from Stratum 2. Four of
the undecorated beads were made from the small long
bones of mammals, but the remainder were fashioned
from the much lighter shafts of bird bones. They vary in
diameter from 3 to 5 millimeters, and in length from 1.4 to
6.3 centimeters. In Plate 8, A-E, are shown examples from
each of the main size groups. Most of these beads have
smooth and well-finished ends, but some are rather rough.
On the latter the method of cutting bone is evident: the
bone was encircled with a groove and then broken at this
weakened zone. Some beads have a glossy finish, presumably due to long wear and considerable handling. The
single bead from Stratum 2 is poorly finished and made from
mammal bone.
Like the undecorated beads, the decorated ones are cylindrical and, with one exception, made from bird bones. The
exceptional one is made of mammal bone. These beads
differ from the undecorated beads only in being a little
larger in size on the average, in being better finished and
smoothed at the ends, and in having incised designs.
Execution of the design varies from very crude to fine, precise work, strictly comparable to that on the incised awls
and pins described above. The designs are simple and
geometric in character. Three beads are crosshatched over
the entire surface (Plate 8, K), and another has a design
consisting of three zones of crosshatching, one encircling
each end and a third in the middle (Plate 8, L). One bead
is made from a bone with a triangular cross section, and
on each of the three surfaces three parallel lines zigzag

The Kent-Crane Si~e

61

back and forth the full length of the bead (Plate 8, O).
Another has a similar zigzag design, but it runs around the
bead rather than along it (Plate 8, N.)

Still another has a

diagonal band of crosshatching at one end and four diagonally hatched lines at the other (Plate 8, M). Two beads
have parallel lines filled with hatching that run diagonally
along the bead (Plate 8, I) ; these diagonal elements are two
in number and located on opposite sides of the bead. One
bead fragment, which exhibits the most precise incising
in the series, has broad bands of hatching outlined by parallel lines. These bands run diagonally across the bead and
are separated by narrow undecorated bands which stand
out negatively (Plate 8, J). Finally, there are three beads
that have short, transverse hatch marks running the length
of the bead. The marks vary somewhat in width, depth,
and regularity, as may be seen in Plate 8, F-H).
There is no significant stratigraphic change in bead design
and technique of execution. The only important observation that needs to be made is that bone bead making, like
other traits previously noted, almost dies out in the last
stage of occupation at the Kent-Crane site.
Miscellaneous Bone and Antler Objects. Two shafts of
mammal long bones, represented by fragments, have incised
decoration. One fragment (Plate 8, DD) has two parallel
zigzag lines and marginal notching; the other (Plate 8, CC)
has t~vo rows of transverse hatch mar~.~. Both fragments
are from Stratum lb.
From each stratum came a number of bird bones showing
evidences of having been worked (ten from Stratum la,
eight from lb, and four from 2). All appear to be articular
and adjoining shaft sections of bird long bones and ~vere
unquestionably the residue from the manufacture of bone
beads. In every specimen the shaft end shows a clean transverse break. A groove had been cut into the bone, which
was then broken by force.
Eight fish vertebrae are included in the collection of bones
from this site. They may have been used as beads, but of

62

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

this there is no clear proof. The only supporting evidence is
the fact that the thin central septum seems to have been
perforated. These vertebrae vary from tiny (7 millimeters
in diameter) to fairly large (1.9 centimeters in diameter).
Six of these came from Stratum lb, and one each came from
Stratum 2 and the surface (Plate 8, P).
Antler flakers are represented by five specimens, of which
four are tip fragments. All have bluntly rounded points, and
one in particular (Plate 7, N) shows considerable wear on
an area about 1.5 centimeters from the tip on the longitudinally convex side.
Stratigraphically these are distributed as follows: three in Stratum la, one each in lb and
2. In Stratum la there were nine antler tips, two showing
evidences of having been cut, rather than broken, from the
antler shaft. In each case a deep groove had been cut around
the antler, and the tip was then snapped off by force. In
Stratum 2 was one small but complete, unworked antler,
th~ base still attached.
STONE OBJECTS. At the Kent-Crane site 208 objects of
stone were found. These include 172 objects of chipped stone
--projectile points, knives, blades, and a drill. The material
used for these was almost entirely flint, though an occasional
projectile point was made of quartzite. Among the other
stone objects are twenty abrading stones of coarse limestone
and sandstone, seven hammerstones of flint nodules or
quartzite pebbles, four pieces of pigment showing striations,
and five fragments of sflicified fossil bone, some of which
appear to show attempts at chipping. These various rocks
are not found on the Coastal Prairie. The people who lived
at thAs site must have gone inland for their stone or else
have obtained it through trade with inland groups.
Projectile Points. The Kent-Crane site yielded 103 projectile points of chipped stone. This figure does not include
twenty fragments whose size and partial outlines indicate
that they are surviving portions of projectile points. The
stone used for manufacturing these projectile points is almost
entirely flint. This flint is of a good grade for chipping
purposes, and it occurs in a variety of colors and shades,

Flint projectile ~in~s frt*m

PL A’I~I,~ 9
Kent-Crane Site. Texas Coast.

The Kent-Crane Site

.gray and buff predominating.
made of quartzite.

65

Two projectile points are

One feature present in some projectile points requires
brief comment. This is the presence of dark stains and
small bits of asphalt on the stems of fourteen dart points.
In a few cases it is possible to discern the total area covered
by this substance, which is evidently used as an adhesive
to facilitate halting. This area covers the whole stem up
to a line drawn across the shoulders. No trace of asphal~
occurs on any of the unstemmed points.
In this group of 103 projectile points only two specimens
can be identified as arrowpoints (Plate 10, M and Q); the
remainder are considered to be dart points. Martin,9 implies that no chipped projectile points were found in his
test pit, but he says that the surface of the ridge has frequently yielded "finely made arrowheads and spearheads."
He adds that at the northern and southern ends of the site
"birdpoints" are the most common projectile points found.
By "birdpoints" he means small arrowpoints as opposed to
the larger forms, for which we are using the term "dart
point." Thus there is evidence of a greater frequency of
arrowpoints at the Kent-Crane site than our data here shows.
Inasmuch as the evidence from excavation points conclusively toward the occurrence of arrowpoints only at the very
top of the cultural deposit, Martin’s statement about finding them on the surface is not surprising. Pie does not state
just how many projectile points of the various forms were
found on the surface, and he does not illustrate any from
this site which can be identified in his plates. As stated
previously, the arrowpoints represent Rockport focus occupation at the Kent-Crane site, and Martin’s remarks suggest
that Rockport focus materials are more common at the
northern and southern ends of the midden.
The projectile points from this site have been sorted out
into small groups on the basis of rather close similarities in
outline and size. Plates 9 and 10 illustrate every one of

19o

Martin, n. d., p. 6.

Texas Archeological ant Paleontological Society

66

these small groups, as well as a number of single occurrences
whose forms are judged to be distinctive, and Table I shows
the provenience by strata of each of these groups and single
occurrences. It is believed that this method of presentation
will provide a satisfactory basis for later comparative studies
of projectile point forms.
The largest general class of dart points in the Kent-Crane
series consists of those which have stems with lateral edges
that are more or less parallel and bases that vary from
slightly concave to slightly convex. In this class are placed
forty-eight points represented by specimens shown in Plate
9, A-P. The main variations are in size, relative proportions
of stem and blade, and shoulder treatment. Thirty of these
occur in Stratum 1, eighteen in Stratum 2. Those in
Stratum 2 are notably smaller in size.
TABLE I
PROVENIENCE OF PROJECTILE POINTS SHOWN IN
PLATES 9 AND 10
Plate

9,
9,
9,
9,

Stratum

la

Stratum

lb

Stratum

2

Surface

Total

--

~

1
2
2
4

-----

-----

3
2
5
7

1

~

B
C
D
E

2
-3
3

9, A

1

’9, F

2

1

3

--

6

9, G
9, H
I
9,
J
9,
9, K
9, L
9, M

3
2
2
1
1
2
--

2
1
-~

1
--~

6
3
2
1

-2
--

-1
2

-----~

9, N

--

1

-1
1

1
--2
2

9,
9,
9,
9,
9,

O
P
Q
R
S

-1

1

--

5
2

~

~

1

-1
~

~
~
~

--

~

1

1

1
2
1
2
5

The Kent,-Cra~e Site

9
9
9
9
9
9
9

T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z

-1
-1
---1

1
-2
-1
1
3
1

-2
2
-2
2
---

---------

1

2

1

--

--

7

2

1

--

10

4
1

2

10, A
10, B
10, C
10, D
10, E
10, F
10, G
10, H
10, I
10, J
10, K
10, L
10, M
10, N
10, O
10, Q

---

1
--

-1

---

1
1

1
--1
---

-1
--1
--

--1
----

-----1

1
1
1
1
1

Totals

42

39

20

2

103

The next largest class consists of dart points which are
characterized by a triangular outline with diagonally
directed side notches that form an expanding stem. These
points are rather short and broad of blade; they have welldeveloped shoulders which are frequently barbed; and they
differ from one another chiefly in basal outline, which may
be straight, slightly concave, or slightly convex. The greatest width is usually at the base, rather than across the
shoulders. In this group are twenty-seven specimens illustrated by Plate 9, R-AA. Seventeen of these are from
Stratum 1, nine from Stratum 2.
A third class, represented by sixteen dart points, con-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological SocieSy

sists of stemless, triangular points with pronounced basal
thinning (Plate I0, !k-D, O). All except one of these occur in
Stratum 1.

At least four variants are recognizable, of

which the most common (ten cases) is a triangle with
straight to slightly convex base and lateral edges (Plate
I0, C). This is very similar to type Taylor Thinned Base
of the Clear Fork focus.~o A second variant differs from the
first by having alternately beveled lateral edges (Plate
10, B) and is similar to type Baird Beveled Blade of the
Clear Fork focus,zl A third variant has an elongated
triangular form, and the base and lateral edges are slightly
convex (Plate 10, A and D). The fourth variant is similar
to the third, but has a concave base and large basal flake
scars (Plate 10, O).
Two dart points from Stratum 1 are probably intrusive
from the Edwards Plateau aspect of Central Texas. One of
these (Plate 10, K) appears to be a variant of type Pedero
hales Indented Base, diagnostic of the Round Rock focus~;
and the other is a Nolan Beveled Stem point (Plate 10, L),
which is diagnostic of the Clear Fork focus.~3 Other dart
points in the Kent-Crane series may eventually be recognized as intrusive from South Texas cultures that have not
yet been clearly defined. The arrowpoint shown in Plate
10, M, belongs to type Perdiz Pointed Stem, a type which
has a very wide distribution in late prehistoric times in the
Texas area.
To summarize, stemmed and triangular points are favored
in the early part of the occupation at the Kent-Crane site.
The diagonally notched group later increases in favor as the
stemmed and triangular points decline. True arrowpoints
are in use only in the final stage of occupation (Rockport
focus).
Knives and Blades.
Only six chipped flint knives are
complete enough to permit grouping on the basis of out20.
21.
22.
23.

Kelley, 1947, p. 99
Op. VAt., p. 99 and
Opo vat., p. 99 and
Op. eit., p. 99 and

and Plate X, b.
Plate X, a.
Plate X, e.
Plate Xo d.

PLATE 10
Flint artifacts from Kent-Crane Site, Texas Coast. A-I, K-O, Q, projectile po|nt~s;
P, W0 knives; S. piano-convex end-scrapers: T-U. side-scrapers ; V, scraper-graver.

The Kent-Crane Site

line.

71

Two of these came from Stratum la, four from lb.

But there are sixteen fragments whose size and general appearance seem to indicate that they can be classed as knives.
Seven of these came from Stratum la, seven from Ib, and two
from Stratum 2.
The six fairly complete knives are all triangular in outline, and the lateral edges are slightly convex. The differences are chiefly those of size and slight modifications of
the base, which varies from straight (Plate 10, P) to slightly
convex (Plate 10, W, showing thermal fracture scars). The
extremes of size are illustrated in Plate 10, P and W. These
knives are relatively thin, none being over 8 millimeters in
thickness.
The term "blade" is here used to refer to chipped flin~
artifacts which have the general form of knives but are very
thick and crudely chipped. Seven such artifacts were found
at the Kent-Crane site, and they are about evenly distributed
stratigraphically (two in Stratum la, two in lb, and three
in 2). These blades are oval in outline and are very roughly
chipped out by the percussion technique. All are rather
small, the largest having a maximum length of 5.4 centimeters; in thickness they vary from 1 to 2.3 centimeters.
Drills and Gravers.
One small flint flake with a thin,
sharp point (Plate 10, R) came from Stratum lb. Both
faces bear flake scars. Presumably this was used for purposes of perforation; the point is thin and does not seem
strong enough to have been used for engraving.
Six small flint flakes with beak-like protuberances are
probably engraving tools and doubtless were used in carving designs on bone. In each case the small protuberance
or point shows minute pressure flake scars on each lateral
edge. One of these gravers is a combination scraper-graver
(Plate I0, V), for the side opposite the point has a small,
neatly chipped concave scraping edge. Two gravers came
from Stratum la and four from lb.
Scrapers. Only one end- scraper of the piano-convex type
appears in the series (Plate 10, S), and it has one lateral

72

Texas Archeological and Paleo~tologica! Society

edge that is also steeply retouched.

The bulbar face bears

several large flake scars, and the dorsal surface shows two
large thermal fracture scars.

This scraper came from

Stratum lb.
The remainder of the scraping tools are side-scrapers with
varying amounts of retouching along one or two long edges.
Two of these are from Stratum lb, seven from lb, and four
from Stratum 2. Of these thirteen scrapers only three show
very much chipping (Plate 10, T). The rest are flakes which
show a certain amount of careless retouching along portions
of one or two long edges. One (Plate 10, U) is a lunate flint
flake with slightly concave lateral edge which bears minute
serrated chipping.
Abrading Stores. Twenty limestone and sandstone fragments, principally the latter, show that they were used for
purposes of abrasion. Fifteen of these stones were found
in Stratum la, five in lb. Seven show long, shallow grooves
(Plate 7, O), and the remainder bear very shallow, oval,
basin-like areas (Plate 7, P). These stone fragments have
no consistent shapes, and they range in size from small, thin,
water-worn stones 5 centimeters long to thicker, heavier
fragments 16.4 centimeters long. Small size and portability
seem to have been their chief prerequisites. There can be
little doubt that they were used in the manufacture of bone
and shell artifacts, so numerous at this site.
Hammerstones.
Seven hammerstones may be grouped
on the basis of the kind of material used. Two (one each
from Stratum la and lb) are oval, stream-rolled pebbles
which show battering along their edges. One is made of
quartzite and the other of a very heavy bluish stone. The
five remaining hammerstones consist of heavily battered
flint nodules. All of these are relatively small and tend to
be oval in outline; the largest has a maximum diameter of
6.2 centimeters. These nodular hammerstones were all
found in Stratum 2.
Pigment. In Stratum 1 were four pieces of soft stone that
appear to have been used as sources of pigment. Two pieces

The Kent-Crane Site

73

of reddish brown pigment came from la, and one of these
shows striations in three small, basin-like areas. Apparently
the pigment was removed in minute quantities by scratching
with a sharp instrument, probably of stone. Two pieces of a
soft, yellowish stone bear abraded facets which seem to indicate use as a source of pigment.

Both came from

Stratum lb.
Worked Fossil Bone.

Five fragments of highly sflicified

fossil bone were obtained from the Kent-Crane midden, and
two of these show traces of what appears to be attempted
chipping.

From Stratum la is a rib fragment (length 9.2

centimeters) with rough flake scars at both ends. From
Stratum 2 is a horse tooth which has been split longitudinally, and one of the resulting sharp edges has a small,
roughly chipped concavity that could have served as a concave scraping edge. It cannot be proved that these two
bones were actually chipped by man, but the evidence is
strongly suggestive of it. If it is assumed that man did this
work, the most likely explanation of the presence of such
bones in the midden is to be found in the local shortage of
stone for making tools and implements. Any material that
even looked suitable might have been collected.
ASPHALT. Martin2~ reports finding a lump of asphalt
"several pounds in weight" near the base of the test pit
which he dug at the Kent-Crane site. Duffen’s excavations
revealed no lumps of this size, but a large number of
smaller lumps were scattered throughout the shell deposit.
Twenty-three of these small lumps are of special interest
because they bear impressions of basketry and matting.
These fragments are small, but a few show unmistakable
evidences of the twined technique in basketry (Plate 8, KKMM, drawn from squeezes). No impression in any way
suggested coiled basketry. Specific information on techniques used in matting could not be obtained, the evidence
for matting consisting only of impressions of coarse parallel

24.

Martin, n. d., V, 6.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

74

elements without any indicating of transverse elements
tying them together.
The fragments of asphalt showing basketry impressions
range in thickness from 7 to 18 millimeters, and it is reasonable to conclude that they represent a heavy coating for
waterproofing purposes. It has already been shown that
asphalt was also used as an adhesive for attaching dart
points to their shafts.
POTTERY. The pottery from the Kent-Crane site includes three types which are being designated as Rockport
Black-on-gray, Rockport Plain, and Rockport Incised. Full
descriptions of these types are to be given in another publication. The sherds from the Kent-Crane site number only
ninety-six and, as stated above, all came from the surface
or in the upper 15 centimeters of Stratum 2. Martinz~
mentions that potsherds were found in the area where the
drainage ditch was cut through the site in 1922. He does
not describe the sherds which he found.
The Rockport Black-on-gray fragments include one rim
sherd (Plate 8, X) from a vessel with an incurred rim and
fiat lip, the latter being painted with asphalt; and fifteen
body sherds, eight having a wavy line decoration (Plate 8,
NN-PP) and the remainder bearing parts of unrecognizable
designs.
Four of the last group show asphalt-coated
interiors.
Eight Rockport Plain rim sherds (Plate 8, EE-II) are from
vessels with incurved or straight rims. All lips are fiat
save one, which is rounded. None of this group of sherds
shows any trace of asphalt coating.
The majority of sherds are body sherds from either Rockport Plain or Rockport Black-on-gray vessels, but more
likely the former, as they seem to belong to the same vessels
as the rim sherds of Rockport Plain. Only about four vessels appear to be represented. Sixty-seven body sherds are
placed in this group. One is a bottom sherd (Plate 8, JJ)
25.

Ibid.

The Kent-Crane Site

75

indicating a vessel base which is very close to being conical.
Only four sherds show any trace of asphalt coating. Light
scoring on the interior is exhibited by one set of these body
sherds.
Finally there are five sherds of Rockport Incised pottery,
all obviously from the same vessel. They are reddish-brown
in color, and the paste is very sandy, showing tiny white
inclusions. Three sherds which fit together (Plate 8, QQ)
show roughly parallel incised lines, apparently forming a
zone just below the lip, and just below this zone two lines
form an angle. A fourth sherd (Plate 8, RR) exhibits a
pair of fringed lines.
Conclusio~
All except the upper few centimeters of deposit at the
Kent-Crane site is referred to Aransas focus occupation.
The only Rockport focus traits present at this site are potsherds and arrowpoints, and these occur in the upper 15 centimeters of deposit or on the surface. The Rockport occupation in the areas tested by excavation is therefore very slight.
Further excavation in other parts of the site would undoubtedly result in the accumulation of much more data on
Rockport focus occupation, and this is borne out by Martin’s
surface collections at the site, which show more Rockport
projectile point types at the extreme northern and southern
parts of the site.
The Kent-Crane site furnishes us with the largest sample
to date of Aransas material culture. The various bone, shell,
and stone objects which characterize the Aransas focus occur
here in large enough numbers to give the main outlines of
the culture. The Kent-Crane site and the smaller Johnson
site nearby provide the greater part of the evidence which
supports the concept of an Aransas focus.
The Kent-Crane site has some traits not found at the
other Aransas focus sites and thus adds to our knowledge
to that extent. These include conch shell disks, a few types
of bone awls and pins, carving on bone, and a rather large
number of projectile point forms. Intrusive dart points from

Texa~ Archeo~ogical and Paleontologica~ Societ11
the Edwards Plateau aspect of Central Texas also occur in
the Kent-Crane site.
There is no way of safely estimating the length of occupation at this site. It must have been used over a longer period
of time than most of the sites in this section of the Texas
coast, for the midden deposit, although not notably thick, is
the thickest on record. The occupation was long enough for
some modification in culture to have taken place within the
Aransas component. Projectile point forms, for instance,
show significant percentage shifts. Then there is the somewhat perplexing diminution in the frequencies of all types
of artifacts in Stratum 2. The deposit continued to accumulate, but the number of objects found is low relative to
Stratum 1. Some sort of a decline appears to have taken
place. It is possible that the stratigraphic break between
Stratum 1 and 2 represents a period when the site was unoccupied, and that later it was used by an Aransas group
whose culture had undergone some modification. It is
barely possible that the upper part of the Kent-Crane site
records a slow transition from an Aransas to a Rockport
culture. This is speculation, but it raises a question which
future field investigators must keep in mind.
No objects of European origin were found at the KentCrane site, and there is no reason to suspect that any part
of the Aransas occupation is of post-European date. The
Rockport occupation, however, very likely was late prehistoric or historic in date, as European objects have been
found in association with Rockport materials at a number of
sites on the Texas coast.
Literature Cited
Campbell, T. N.
(1947) The Johnson site: Type site of the Aransas focus
of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo~ogical
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 40-75.
Fenneman, Nevin
(1938) Physiography of eastern United States.

New

The Kent-Crane Site

York and London.
Gunter, Gordon
(1950) Unusual climatic conditions in Texas in 19491950 and its relation to the spread of huisache. The
Texas Journa~ o~ Science, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 366-367.
Kelley, J. Charles
(1947) The cultural affiliations and chronological position of the Clear Fork focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
Martin, George C.
(n. d.) Preliminary archaeological survey of a portion
of the Texas coast made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately printed.
Price, W. Armstrong, and Gordon Gunter
(1943) Certain recent geological and biological changes
in South Texas, with consideration of probable causes.
Proceedings and Transactions of the Texas Academy of
Science for 1942, Vol. 26, pp. 138-156.
Russell, Richard Joel
(1945) Climates of Texas. Anna~s of the Association
American Geographers, Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 37-52.
Tharp, Benjamin Carroll
(1939) The vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy Publications in Natural History, Non-Technical Series, No. 1.

THE BONNELL SITE

The Bonnell Site is situated in an area where the present
archaeological picture is not clear. Thus far only a few sites
have been excavated in the area, and the cultural context is
largely hypothecated. In order to add to the archaeological
knowledge of the area and to define the relationship with
other cultures, field expeditions were organized by Texas
Technological.College in the summers of 1950 and 1951.
Site Location. The site is located on the Bonnell Ranch,
Lincoln County, in Southeastern New Mexico. This ranch is
fourteen miles east northeast of Ruidoso. The site lies on a
mesa across Highway 70 from the ranch house and overlooks the Ruidosa valley near the junction of Fort Stanton
Creek and the Ruidoso River.
Physiography. The Bonnell Ranch is located in the Sacramento region of the Basin and Range Province, only eight
miles west of the line which divides this Province from the
Pecos section of the Great Plains Province.1
The Sacramento section is a long north-south strip that is
three hundred miles long, but nowhere over seventy miles
wide. It is more or less plateau-like throughout, faulted and
strongly sloping. It contains mature block mountains of
gently tilted strata and block plateaus. Bolsons generally
characterize the Basin and Range Province, and are present
in ~his section. The line of mountains that dominate this
section of the Province are, from north to south, the Jicarilla, Sierra Blanca, Sacramento, Guadalupe, and the Delaware. All are monoclinal ranges bounded on the west by
fault scarps and consisting largely of eastward d,.’pping carboniferous limestones. Sierra Blanca peak reaches a height
of 12,003 feet. The Capitan Mountains represent an eastward
volcanic spur. The Bonnell Ranch is east of the Sierra Blanca
and south of the Capitan Mountains.
I. Fennernan, Nevin M,, Physiography of the Western United States, New York:
M~’~raw Hill Book Company, 1931, pp. 47-50, 327-395.

The Bonnell Site

79

Less than ten miles to the east is the border of the Pecos
section of the Great Plains Province. The central part of the
Pecos section is an alluvial filled basir~ This plain stretches
fifty miles north and a greater distance south of Roswell.
It has a width of five to thirty miles. The soil is similar to
that of the High Plains. The topography is suited to irrigation and a water supply is available from the Pecos and
from abundant artesian water constantly replenished by
rains on the nearby mountains to the west.
The Ruidoso River Valley varies in width from one-eighth
to one-half mile in the vicinity of the site. The valley bottom
is covered with an alluvial soil, and at the present time,
supports a heavy growth of fruit orchards and fields of
grains, such as wheat, oats, rye, and barley.
Geology.2 The mesa on which the Bormell Site is located
is forty-seven feet high, and is composed entirely of Pleistocene stream gravel, capped with one to four feet of finer
alluvial deposits. The stream gravel was evidently dep_osited
by a large river with a high velocity; this is indicated by
the large size of the boulders in the deposit and by the cross
bedding which shows that the river changed its course, The
present valley could be the result of a fault or of down cutting by the stream. There was formerly less difference between the valley floor and the mesa than at the present time,
since the stream is now cutting down instead of filling.
Climate. The climate is characterized by cold winters, and
summers with hot days and cool nights. Ther~e is a marked
variation in climate and life zones within this area, which is
due almost entirely to the range in altitude. Because of the
high evaporation in the low country, effective precipitation
increases, with altitude. There is a decided variation in the
seasonal distribution of rainfall. For example, at Fort Stanton, which is about ten miles from the site and has an elevation of 6,331 feet, the rainfall is .50 inch in January and 3.21
inches in July. The nearest weather recording station is
2.
Information about the geological formations of the mesa was supplied by
Glenna Kee~ee and Selman Cooke, graduate geolo~ry students in the 1950 field school.

8O

Te~s A~cheologica! and Pa~eo~to~ogica~ Soci~t~j

located at Fort Stanton; there the average annual precipitation is fifteen inches, with the recorded extremes varying
from six inches to twenty-five inches. The average for the
Bonnell Ranch is somewhat lower, due to the lower altitude.
Bioti~ P~’ov~ce. The site is in the eastern periphery of the
Navahonian biotic province as defined by Dice.3 Some fifty
miles to the east is the Kansan Province, which is the shortgrass region covering the southern part of the semi-arid
Great Plains. The Navahonian Province is characterized by
pinon and juniper woodland. The pinon-juniper growth is
in clumps, with the intermediate area being covered by
grasses and small scrub bushes. The most common grass is
blue gama, associate~d with which are a number of other
plants, such as narrow leafed yucca, prickly pears, and
milk-weeds.4
Game animals that inhabit the immediate vicinity are
deer, antelope, mountain sheep, and cougar. There are also
numerous small animals such as rabbit, squirrel, skunks,
porcupines, and bats.
Grozvi~zg Season. The growing season is somewhat related
to altitudes, but sheltered valleys give a longer growing
season than would be expected at high altitudes. The growing season at Bonnell extends from May 2 to October 20,
or one hundred and sixty-one days. The temperature ranges
from 0° F. to 110° F.~ Below zero temperatures are rare in
the valley, although they are common in the hills and in the
Pecos Valley.
Water’. In the general area of southeastern New Mexico
surface water is not plentiful at the present, and probably
little was available to the aboriginal population. A few
springs occur. Away from the main rivers, the few permanent mountain streams are quickly lost in the pourous valley
$. Dice. Lee R., The Biotic Provinces of No~rth America, Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Pres~, 1943, p. 39.
4. Bailey, Vernon. Life Zones and Crop Zones of New Mexico, Wv~hington : U. S.
Department of Agriculture, No. 15, 1913, l~p. "/-74.
5. Culver, C. A.. Co-op Observer. Ruido~o, New Mexico. personal correspondence.
October, 1950.

The Bonnel! Site

81

fill. The numerous shallow depressions which collect surface
run-off during the rainy season must have been the main
prehistoric water supply. Many contain water for several
months.
Contrary to the general situation, the water supply at the
Bonnell Ranch in prehistoric times may have been less
serious than elsewhere in the area, because there are springs
across the Ruidoso River from the ranch which have not
dried up since 1856, when weather records were begun in
the area. The Ruidoso River is considered a permanent
stream, although in dry years it only flows as far as Glencoe
or San Patricio. This means that even in dry years the Bennell Site was only a short distance from water, since it is
only two miles to Glencoe upstream, and San Patricio is
four miles downstream. The snow cover on the Sierra
Blanca range is available for stream flow after the spring
thaws.
Excavation. The Bonnell Site consists of a number of low
knolls, the result of successive occupations in local areas,
scattered over an area of approximately five acres along
the .edge of the mesa. The knolls are generally less than
four feet above the surrounding area. Five of the knolls are
well defined. The largest elevation, which is the easternmost,
was chosen for excavation. It is approximately one hundred
feet north and south and ninety feet east and west.
Excavation was done by members of three archaeological
field schools from Texas Technological College, under the
supervision of Dr. W. C. Holden. Actual field work was
directed by the author. The field schools were held in the
summers of 1950, 1951, and 1952, and each school had a
duration of five weeks. Fill was removed in sections four
feet square and six inches deep. All dirt was troweled and
screened.

Previov.s Work in the Area. Archaeological investigation
of this area started in 1925; however few scientific excavations have been carried out. A definite archaeological
picture has not been formed to date. Since excellent sum-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

82

maries of the pertinent published material are available to
the reader in other bulletins,6 such an anotated bibliography
will be omitted here.
Houses

There was probably a long occupational period at Bonnell
as is evidenced by the depth of the fill, which reaches five
and one-half feet in thickness. There was a superimposition
of house floors throughout the fill. A basic pattern is discernable in the structure of most of the houses. Not all of
the houses show all of the features, and each of the features
has a wide range of variations; however, there is enough
consistency in construction to allow the definition of a basic
pattern, which follows:
1. The house is usually partially subterranean, with the
floors being from three inches to twenty-two inches below
the ground surface at the time of occupation. Some of the
pits have straight, well-plastered walls and level floors.
others have irregular walls and rough floors.
2. Four central posts carry the weight of the roof. These
are fairly large posts that are set in the soil at a depth of
eight to twenty-five inches. Usually these posts are pine or
cottonwood. Cross beams are placed between these central
posts, and these cross beams carry the roof (Figure 5).

FI GU]t~E 5
Diagram

of

house-type,

]]onnell

Site.

6. Consult: Lehmer, Donald J., The 3ornada Branch of the ]~|ogollon, Tuc~n:
The University of Arizon Prc~. Social Science Bulletin, I~o. 17, 1948.
Mera, Ho P., An Outline of Ceramic Development~ in Southern and Southeastern
New Mexico, Santa Fe: Laboratory of Anthropology, 1943. Technical Series, Bulletin
No. 1.

The Bonnel! Site

3.

83

Secondary posts of cedar are set in the room at irrego

ular intervals. These are sometimes used in the wall; in this
case, the posts were set close to the wall, and slanted toward
the cross beams. Small wall posts could be set at the floor
level or in the ground outside of the pit. Many small post~
were found that could not have been used in wall construc~
tion; they were probably associated with the various domestic affairs.
4. The fire area is centrally located. Construction varie~
from deep, well-plastered pits of less than a ten inch diameter to large shallow depressions with an irregular outline
covering an area thirty-six inches across.
5. The superstruct~ure of the building was made by
placing poles at intervals of eight to twenty inches apar~
at the outer edge of the building. Presumably the walls:,
were completed by interweaving brush through the poles
and plastering. These small poles were usually not deeply
embedded in the earth, but set in shallow depressions. Evidence for the covering of brush and clay is found in the’
form of large pieces of baked clay with reed and brush
impressions on them, and layers of charred reeds in the
roof fall-in of buildings.
Construction Timber. The timber used in house construc-.
tion consists of cedar, pine, and cottonwood. Cottonwoods~
grow along the Ruidoso River at the present time, and hence"
were available within one-quarter of a mile. The cedar is
native to these hills, and is also readily available; however"
the nearest pine at the present time is on the higher slope~
of the Sierra Blanca Mountains.
Discussion of Individual Houses. House 1 (See Figure 4)..
This is the largest pit house encountered. This floor level is"
five feet five inches below the present ground surface. It:
measures twenty-one feet eleven inches by twenty-two fee~
two inches. In depth, the pit varies from twenty-one inches’
to twenty-two inches. Walls are straight and well-plastered"
with a light colored clay. The floor has been likewise plas-

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FIGURE 4

Floor pla~s of Bonue]! Site rooms,

The Bonnet! Site

tered until hard and level. The walls of the building are
placed nearly square to the points of the compass.
Four large posts formed a square in the central part of
the room. All of these post holes had a diameter of between
eleven inches and sixteen inches. These formed the basis for
the cross beams of the roof. A few disintegrated fragments
of the wood remained in each hole. On the east side, between the two major posts, was a large supporting post of
white pine which had not been set in a post hole, but merely
rested on the floor. It is about ten inches in diameter and
had been burned to within some two inches of the floor.
Secondary posts were located around the edge of the
walls, and some were in the room proper: Wall posts were
laced both at the floor level and at the top of the pit.
ften, the post was embedded at the floor level, and
cessed into the wall, so that the wall plaster covered the
pole. Cedar was used for these posts.

~

Five small posts were set in the room (Figure 4). These
could have been used to hang things on, or they could have
been used for some domestic purpose that is not now discernable.
~Roof construction is thought to be the same as the walls.
Small poles of two to four inch diameter were used on
rafters across the large supporting roof beams, spaced about
sixteen to eighteen inches apart. This was topped by small
poles laid close together and covered with brush or reeds.
The whole was covered by a thick layer of clay. This provided a well insulated dwelling. One charred end of a large
cross beam was found in the northwest corner of the pit
house. It was cottonwood with a diameter of twenty inches.
This beam showed evidence of being worked into a plank;
it has a rather uniform thickness of three inches. Undoubtedly there was an air vent in the roof above the fire pit.
The fire pit of this house was roughly in the center of the
room. It has a sixteen inch diameter, and is six inches deep
at the center. This fire place has the shape of a gently

86

Texo-~ ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

rounded bowl; and the interior is smoothly and heavily
plastered.
Artifacts encountered in this pit house include pottery,
bone objects, and stone implements. Numerous pottery
sherds were found of the local types, such as E1 Paso ware,
Plain Brown ware, Chupadero Black-on-White, Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, and Lincoln Black-on-Red. Two complete pottery vessels were recovered. One is a Chupadero
Black-on-White jug which was sitti.ng in the southeast
corner (Plate 16, A). This jug is eight inches tall and seven
and one-half inches in diameter. In direct association with
the jug were six bone gaming pieces. The other pottery
vessel is Lincoln Black-on-Red; however, it lacks the characteristic black design. This bowl is seven inches in diameter and two and five-eighths inches high. Three bone awls
were found, two of which are split long bones, while the
other is a deer ulna awl with the effigy of a mountain sheep
carved on the handle (Plate 17, b). Three crude hammerstones and a fragmentary arrow shaft straightener are the
stone implements associated with this house.
House 2 was occupied later than House 1, because it is
higher in the stratigraphy of the site, and the east side
overlaps the outline of the first house (Figure 4). Three
occupational periods of this room are indicated by three
floor levels. The earliest floor is about two and one-half feet
below the present surface. There are eight inches of fill
between this and the middle floor level. The latest floor
level is separated from the middle floor by three inches of
fill. Each of the floors is of hard packed clay. The house was
built in a pit. On the south side an adobe wall had been built
which was nineteen inches wide, and two feet high at the
time of the first occupation. The wall remained the same
height for the subsequent occupation, hence the pit became
more shallow as the fill accumulated. The other walls of
the pit seem irregular; however, it is diffic~flt to discern the
original height of the pit as the area has been disturbed by
previous digging. The adobe wall on the south served as the
partition between rooms two and three (Figure 4).

A, r~om 15: Bo ~t h~le de~ig~ |~ are~t t~tw~ r~ont I a~d r~m 15~

The Bonnel! Si~e

89

Four central posts were present at all three floor levels,
as were secondary posts. Set in the south adobe wall are
depressions where small poles had been set. Some of these
post holes were four inches deep, while others were only
two inches in depth. Presumably the usual construction of
poles slanting from the ground to the cross beams and covered with brush and mud was followed. Charred vigas found
on the floor indicate that the cross poles of the roof ran
north and south.
The fireplace for the first, or earliest, occupation had a
diameter of ten inches .and was ten inches deep. The walls
of the firepit were straight and well-plastered. There was a
layer of caked ashes in the bottom. The middle floor level
used the same fire pit, building up the sides until the pit
was eighteen inches deep, and the same diameter as the
earlier one. Again the sides are smooth and plastered. The
latest occupation sealed up the old fire pit and had a shallow
depression ten inches in diameter and two inches deep, in
which were found some ashes and charcoal. It was located
above the previous fireplaces. All three of the fireplaces are
located close to the center of the room.
House 3 is located directly south of House 2 (Figure 4),
and they are separated by the common adobe wall. Dimensions of this house are twelve and one-half feet by thirteen
feet. The floor is three feet below the present surface of the
ground. The house is set in a pit that was about twelve
inches deep at the time of occupation. The room has been
refloored once; there is only one inch between the two floors,
which indidates that there was no time lapse between the
two occupations. Both of the floors are smooth and made of
hard clay.
Four centrally located post holes carried the weight of the
roof: The southwest post hole is twenty inches deep and has
a fifteen inch diameter. The southeast one is fifteen inches
deep and eight inches in diameter; the northeast hole is
seven inches deep and has a seven inch diameter; the north-

9O

Texas A~ch~o~ogica! and Paleontological Society

west post hole is fourteen inches deep and six inches in
diameter. Fragments of cedar posts were found in the holes.
All of the secondary posts are located close to the walls
(Figure 4). There is a concentration of large, deep post holes
on the west side of the building. In both the southwest and
the northwest corners were double posts. This could indicate
that more of the weight of the walls and roof were carried
on this side.
From the charred vigas and burned clay that had fallen
into the room, it is presumed that the walls and roof were
completed by placing poles across the large cross beams,
covering these with smaller poles, and topping with mud or
clay.
The fire pit has a twelve inch diameter at the surface, and
a seven inch diameter at the bottom of the pit. In depth, it
measures nine and one-half inches. The interior has been
well plastered, and the bottom had a layer four inches thick
of caked ashes.
House 4 is directly south of houses 2 and 3; however, it belongs to an earlier occupation than either. The floor is five
feet below the present surface of the ground. This house has
an irregular shape. The west wall is ten feet long; the east
wall is thirteen feet ten inches long; the south wall is twelve
feet four inches long; and the north wall is twelve feet nine
inches long. The house was placed in a pit that had been dug
into the gravel. The surface of the gravel was uneven, hence
the depth of the pit varied from seventeen inches on the
east side to twenty-three inches on the north side.
The floor of the pit was rough and was somewhat higher
at the edges of the room, and having the greatest depression
at the center of the room. The rough gravel bottom was
covered by a thin layer of clay that has been worn away in
many places. The walls of the pit had large stream rocks
protruding. No effort had been made to effect a smooth wall;
although some plaster had been irregularly applied.

The Bonnell Site

91

Four central posts formed a rough square in the center
of the room that measured approximately five feet nine
inches. These post holes varied in depth from eighteen
inches to twenty-three inches; and they varied in diameter
from seven to nine inches. There are no secondary posts in
this house. If any small posts were present, they were set on
the ground level of the pit and have been obliterated by
later occupations.
No definite fire pit was in this house. Instead, there was a
~large depressed area in the center of the room where the
fire had been. This area is twenty-eight inches from north
to south and nineteen inches from east to west. In this area
the clay of the floor has been burned to a bright orange, and
there are ashes and charcoal.
In the extreme northwest corner a burial was found. A
hole had been dug through the floor to a depth of thirteen
inches. The opening in the floor measured twenty-four
inches north and south and eighteen inches east and west.
The skeleton was a child of approximately five years. The
body was in a tightly flexed position with the head oriented
to the north. The floor had been sealed after the burial,
which would indicate that the house had been abandoned
after the burial.
House 5 was not followed to the limits of the ~valls because
of previous digging. However, it was possible to ascertain
the p~osition of the four central posts, the fire area, and the
depth of the pit on one side. This house is located south of
House 1 and east of House 3 (Figure 4). This floor level is
thirty inches below the present surface. According to stratigraphy, this house was occupied about the same time as the
lower level of House 2.
Outside dimensions of the room are not available. The
central posts form a rectangle seven feet two inches from
east to west, and the east side of the rectangle is six feet
while the west side is four and one-half feet. These posts
averaged six inches in diameter. Approximately in the cen-

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ter is a bed of ashes. These ashes were caked in an area
twenty-four by eighteen inches. This is the only fire place
associated with this house. The floor was plastered and had
been smooth and even. From the one wall that was found,
it is presumed that this house was in a shallow pit, only
three to four inches deep.
Artifacts associated with this house are a large unidentified bone implement (Plate 17, k), a flat metate fifteen
inches long and nine inches wide, and a mano eight and
one-fourth inches long.
House 6 is approximately square, and is eleven feet north
and south and nine and one-half feet east and west. The
floor level is just above the undisturbed gravel. The house
was no doubt occupied at the same time as House 5 and has
similar characteristics.
Houses 7 and 8 are structures with slab stone walls. These
two rooms have rock walls on two sides. The walls are
formed by large rocks, sometimes measuring eighteen by
eight inches. These are stacked on edge in two or more
courses, being only one rock in thickness. Two such walls
were encountered, one running north and south, the other
running east and west (Plate 12, a and c). The north-south
wall is made of larger rocks, is higher and is in a better state
of preservation. The other wall, which has been subjected
to erosion at the southern edge of the mesa, was made of
smaller, rounder stones. The walls were nearly perpendicular to each other, forming a pattern like a "T". The top of
the "T" runs east-west on the south of the mesa, with the
perpendicular piece running north from the south wall.
Plaster is not present on any of the rocks in the walls. Two
adjacent rooms were formed by these walls, the north-south
wall being the common wall (Fig. 4). There are two levels
of occupation in room 8 with four inches of fill between.
Room 7 did not have a fire place. Each occupational level of
room 8 had a fire place, with the upper one being about two
feet to the northeast of the lower one. Both of the fire pits
of room 8 have diameters of thirteen to fifteen inches and a

The Bonnell Site

95

depth of four to five inches (Plate 12, b). The walls of the
fire pits are straight but unplastered.
South of the southern wall are small projections that
could have been used for storage bins, but nothing was
found in any of them. Just south of the wall of the east room
was a shallow pit in the gravel that contained sherds of E1
Paso pottery, all fire-blackened.
The remaining walls of these houses were supported by
posts. These two rooms were not placed in pits, but the
packed clay of the floor was placed directly on the ground.
Artifacts found in association with the stone walled houses
are identical to those found in the other structures.
House 9 was oblong in shape, being nine feet north and
south and thirteen feet six inches east and west. Its floor
level was just above the undisturbed gravel deposit.and was
well made and easy to trace. On the south edge of the room
is an adobe base wall twelve inches wide and fourteen inches
wide (Fig. 4). The fire place is twelve inches in diameter
and four inches deep, and is well plastered.

Ho~es 10, 11, and 12 are similar,to 5 and 6 and belong to
the same occupational level.
Hoarse 13 belongs to lower, or original occupational level
with its floor being on the undisturbed formation, and being
eighteen to twenty-four inches below the present surface.
The room is approximately thirteen feet north and south
and seventeen feet east and west. Six cedar posts were found
in their original positions within the room. Four of them
were center posts and two with the same spacing and alignment were adjacent to the west wall. There were no corresponding posts or holes near the east wall. The fire pit,
approximately in the center of the room, was well-made and
plastered with clay. An unusual amount of pottery shards
were found immediately on the floor. Two or three ollas
were broken on the floor at the close of, or after, the room’s
last occupation.

96

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Socie~g

House 14 differs from all the others described in this paper
in that it belonged to the upper, or most recent, occupatiom
Its floor level was six inches below the present surface and
is eighteen inches above the levels of Houses 5, 6, 16, and
13. The dimensions of the room are sixteen by ten feet. The
floor is poorly made, indistinct, and hard to follow. The fire
place, located off center, was rough and poorly made. A pit
was dug in the southeast corner of the room, and fifteen
inches below the floor level, another floor of excellent make
was found. In al! likelihood house 14 is superimposed on the
fill above another house which belongs to the same period
as houses 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13.
House 15 is similar in every respect to house 1, only slightly smaller in dimensions, being eighteen feet square. The
original builders had excavated a pit two feet deep, quite
a chore for them considering the hardness of the riverdeposited gravel and boulder formation. A beautiful, smooth,
hard floor had been laid on gravel bottom. Since the house
was abandoned, from eighteen to twenty-four inches of fill
has accumulated above the original ground level, or from
three and one-half to four feet above the floor level.
Obviously the interior of the room burned out shortly
after its abandonment. The charred bases of the four center
posts are still in place. These extend above the floor level
from four to eighteen inches and vary in diameter from
nine to twelve inches (Plate 11, a). On the floor was a segment of roof beam about two feet long and fourteen inches
in diameter. It had doubtless been the beam which connected
the tops of the two west center posts. It had not been charred and was in badly disintegrated form. However, its dimensions were easy to measure.
In the center was a bowl shaped, beautifully plastered
fire place with its top flush with the floor save for a slight
elevation of the rim an inch high and two inches wide. One
foot to the east of the round, central fire place was another,
oblong, with each of the four sides formed by a flat stone

The Bo~e~ ~i~e

~

on edge. The inside dimensions were six by eleven inches.
Both fire places were filled with ashes.
The west wall still retained the original plaster which had
been covered with successive layers of greyish wash. In one
place five thin layers of the wash were intact.
At floor level in the southwest corner was a niche eleven
inches wide and ten inches high. As it extends back, to a
depth of fourteen inches, it slopes downward to a depth of
five inches. The bottom and sides were plastered. The niche
contained a number of pot shards, two pieces of yellow
ochre, and one piece of dark red paint. This niche is similar
to one found in the northwest corner of house 1. Of interest
is a hole in the floor two inches in diameter and nine inches
deep. It is located eighteen inches east of the southeast center post. (Plate 11, A).
S~mmar~j of obse~atio~s on ho~ses. There were two major periods of occupation, the lower, or older period, and the
upper, or later period. An interval of unknown length intervaned between the major occupations. The houses of the
lower occupation followed a similar pattern with a central
fire place, four center posts, leaning side walls for the parts
above ground, and well-made, smooth, compact floors.
Houses of the upper occupation were poorly made, varied
considerably in shape and size, with floors indistinct and
often difficult to trace, small posts, and without well-defined
fire places. There is some evidence that some of the houses
of the later period were rather flimsy, jacal-like structures.
(See post hole pattern in Plate 11, b).

The number of houses of the second occupation, superimposed over those shown in Figure 4 (with the exception of
house 14 which is an upper level room) probably outnumber
the lower level rooms shown. The upper level rooms, with
the exceptien of house 14, are plotted due to the fact that
their floors and boundaries were so indistinct that they
could not be mapped with certainty. Their existence was
indicated by scores of posts and post holes whose bottoms

98

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

terminated in the fill above the floor levels of the lower
rooms. The posts in the upper, looser fill often had rock footings. (Plate 12, d).
Pottery
At the Bonnell Site, as elsewhere in Southeastern New
Mexico, pottery provides the most useful and reliable basis
for cultural classification and dating. Over 100,000 sherds
have been collected from the site. Fifteen pottery types have
been identified, which are as follows: 7
E1 Paso Polychrome
Polished Brown
Plain Brown
Jornado Brown
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
Lincoln Black-on-Red
Chupadero Black-on-White
Corrugated or Rubbed Coil Ware
Mimbres Black-on-White, Bold-Faced
Tularosa Black-on-White
Gila Polychrome
Playas Red Incised
Ramos Polychrome
Agua Fria Glaze-on-Red, or Rio Grande Glaze I
Heshotauthla Glaze-on-Red
Eight types are considered to be resident to the site because of their large occurence. These are E1 Paso Pol~chrome, Polished Brown, Plain t~rown, Jornado Brown,
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, Lincoln Black-on-Red, Chupadero Black-on-White, and corrugated. Mimbres Black-onWhite, Tularosa Black-on-White, Gila Polychrome, Playas
Red Incised, Ramos Polychrome, Rio Grande Glaze I, and
Heshotauthla Glaze are considered to be intrusives.
Brown ware is characteristic of the entire southern area
of the Southwest. E1 Paso Polychrome, Polished Brown,
7. A type collection was identified by Dr. H. P. Mera, Erlk Reed, and Stanley
Stubbs in Santa Fe, August0 1950.

h

The Bonnell Site

101

Plain Brown, and Jornado Brown are identified with the
Jornado culture. Typological differences of the four brown
wares are indefinite at the present time, consequently a
thorough sherd analysis was not possible. Morphological
differences used in distinguishing the four types in this
paper are as follows. E1 Paso Polychrome has a paste that
is gray to black with coarse sand tempering.8 The decoration is red and/or black on brown. Jar rims are thickened
everted (Plate 15, b, d). Walls of the vessels are thin, averaging one-eighth inch in thickness. The most common form
of E1 Paso pottery is the ella or jar (Plate 16, d).
Polished Brown ware has an even paste that is medium
brown in color. The walls of the ollas are about one-fourth
inch thick, which is decidedly thicker than E1 Paso Polychrome. The outside of the jar is a highly polished brown;
the inside of the jar has been scraped smooth. Ollas are the
only form of this ware present at Bonnell.
Plain Brown ware has a light brown paste that is fairly
regular in texture. The vessels are crude and irregularly
made. Usually there is no decoration, but incising and puncrating occur. Walls vary in thickness, but in general they
are about one-fourth inch thick. This ware is the most crude
of the four brown ware types, and more individual variation occurs.
Jornado Brown ware has a black to brown paste of grainy
texture. It is thicker than E1 Paso Polychrome, and is always
in the ella form. Crudely made, it sometimes has a black or
red design of no special form.
Approximately fifty per cent of the Bonnell pottery is
brown ware. Plain Brown and Jornado Brown are the most
numerous. It must be remembered that most of the brown
ware was in the form of large ollas which would break into
more sherds than the smaller jars and bowls of the other
pottery types; hence it is possible that a sherd percentage

8.

~ennlnge. 1940.

102

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

does not give an accurate idea of the actual number of vessels belonging to each pottery type.
Broad- lined Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta comprises
the next most numerous ceramic group. The only known
form is the bowl (Plate 16, c). Rims are direct and flat; the
paste is even and tempered with fine sand. Decoration consists of a broad line applied to the bowl interior (Plate 15,
b, c). The time range begins before 1350 A. D. and ends
c~rca 1450 A. D. Thin-lined decoration is present on only a
few sherds.
Chupadero Black-on-White has a long time range, being
in existence from circa A. D. 1050 to 1650. This ware has a
gray paste with fine sand tempering. The characteristic design is alternating solid black and hatched areas (Plate 15,
b, j and k). The interior is usually given a rough finish by
brushing, which results in striated hnes on the interior surface. The base is a disc type, so called because a disc was
shaped apart from the rest of the vessel, to which the walls
of the jar or bowl were added. The most common form of
Chupadero Black-on-White at Bonnell is a jar with a flaring
rim (Plate 16, c); bowls with straight rims are also found.
On jars the handles are usually formed by two or three
pieces of rolled clay placed side by side. One small ladle of
Chupadero ware was found. This ware was in constant usage
during the occupation of the site.
Corrugated or rubbed coil ware occurs throughout southern New Mexico. This ware at Bonnell ranges from sharp
corrugation to a rubbed-over coil. In color, the range is dull
red to gray and black (Plate 15, B, e).
The paste of Lincoln Black-on-Red is like that of Three
Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, the main difference being in the
decoration. Lincoln Black-on-Red has a deeper red background on the interior and black line decoration (Plate 15,
B, b); however, sometimes, the bowls have the red slip on
the interior, but are lacking the black line decoration.

The Bonne/l Site

103

The remainder of the pottery types represent distinct intrusives, for only a few sherds of each type were found.
Although the intrusive wares are few in number, they give
the best available indication of outside contacts. They also
offer the best technique of dating the site through cross
dating with areas where the chronology has been fully
worked out.
Gila Polychrome occurs in both bowl and olla forms; it is
the second most numerous intrusive. Bowls have black-onwhite interiors, red exteriors, and flaring rims. Ollas have
black-on-white designs on the exterior and are red to yellow
on the interior. This ware, which comes from the Gila Valley
of Arizona, generally from the region about Safford and
west to Globe, has a time range of about A. D. 1350-1450
(Plate 15, B, m).
Mimbres Black on White is the most numerous type of intrusive pottery. It is the late Bold-Face type. There were
Mimbres villages as far east as Ruidoso, and it is likely that
sherds are from these nearby sites (Plate 15, B, f).
Tularosa Black-on-White has a harder paste than the Mimbres Black-on-White and the white is often crackled. The
hatching design is parallel to the area blacked in, and the
black often appears as brown (Plate 15 B, g).
Ramos Polychrome and Playas Red Incised are both from
Chihuahua (Plate 15, B, h and i). These two wares are commonly associated with Gila Polychrome, Chu_padero Blackon-White and St. Johns Polychrome, which would give it an
approximate date of 1350-1450.
Heshotauthla Glaze is represented by six sherds from the
same bowl. This ware is from Zuni, and slightly predates
Agua Fria Glaze-on-Red. It has a redder slip than the Agua
Fria Glaze-on-Red; in fact the slip is sometimes thick enough
to crackle.

Agua Fria Glaze-on.Red, or Rio Grande Glaze I, is a member of the Rio Grande Glaze group, the development of

104

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

which is well-known and accurately dated by dendrochronology. This Glaze I starts about A. D. 1350 and lasts until
1450. The fifteen sherds found at Bonnell probably come
from the southern portion of the glaze area, possibly the
Jornado del l~Iuerto. Since this pottery provides the most
precise date available for the Bonnell Site, it would indicate
that the occupation of the site includes this time period. The
dates of other intrusives also fall generally into this same
time range, and it seems that the closing occupancy was
approximately A. D. 1450. This is substantiated by the absence of Glaze H which would have reached the area by
this date.
Saint John’s Polychrome is rare in this complex, but one
practically complete bowl was found on the floor of room 13.
Ur~dentified sherds numbered approximately 1% of the
v~hole amount. Among these areseveral sherds of a polished
black ware. There is one unidentified black-on-red type.
Miscellaneous objects of pottery include three pipes of
undecorated brown ware, which are tubular and average
three inches in length. Three sherd discs could have been
used as pendants. Some have perforations near the top as
though for suspension and show wear around the holes,
while others have holes .in the center, or merely have a hole
started but not completely drilled. Usually the pottery is a
brown ware, but one black-on-red disc was found. One pottery pendant is in the "~orm of a triangle with notches on
each side; all of the edges are beveled (Plate 15, A, c).
Ground Stone Objects
Grinding and Pounding Implements. Three types of grinding stones occur at the Bonnell Site. They are a trough or
scoop metate, which has been ground with a backward and
forward motion, a flat metate that shows no sign of wear,
and a basin type milling stone which has been ground with
an elliptical or rotary motion. Fourteen grinding stones were
recovered.

The Bo~,~e~l Si~e

10’/

At the proximal end of each trough metate is a flat heel
about four inches in width (Plate 13, o). The distal end is
thinner than the proximal end and is open. This type of
metate averages eighteen inches in length and thirteen
inches in width. The actual basin is about fourteen by
eleven inches.
Basin milling stones average nineteen by sixteen inches.
Only one has the "heel" which occurs on the trough metates.
These all show grinding with an elliptical motion and have
a central basin about four inches in depth. One of these basin
milling stones has been worked on the sides and bottom to
a uniform thickness, while the others are very uneven, varying in thickness from four to seven inches.
The fiat metate is exceedingly ~well made. It m~asures
twenty-four inches in length, fifteen inches in width, aM is
two inches thick at the grinding section. It is of a finer gralm
than the other grinding stones, which are made of coarse
igneous rock. It also has a four inch "heel", which is elevated
one-half inch above the level grinding surface, and there is
no depression from grinding. On the reverse side of the
metate is the imprint of a large cloven hoof. The imprint is
four and one-half inches long.
Seventy-seven manos were recovered in the excavation,
plus fifty-five surface finds that were available for" analysis.
Manos include the two handed cylindrical type, a onehanded oval type, as well as some very large heavy cylindrical specimens. The two handed cylindrical manu" has a:
size range of six to nine inches in length and two to four"
inches in depth. These made up eight.y-two per cent of the;
total manos. This type of mano was probably used with’
trough metates, the mano covering the entire grinding sub,face (Plate 13, o). There is a great deal of variation in the
size uf theoval hand stones. They range from three to six
inches in diameter and from one and one-half to four inches
in depfh,~ and made upten per cent of the total number of
man6s. The~0val mano was probably used with ~ rotar~
¯ milling stone, covering only a part of the grindir~g surface_

108

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Only one flat mano was recovered. It is eleven inches in
length and varies from one-half to three-fourths inch in
thickness (Plate 13, n). This mano is well ground and has
copper oxide stains on one surface.
Three large heavy manos were found. They range in
length from thirteen and one-half inches to sixteen inches
and are five to six inches in width. These manos are exceedingly heavy, and of undetermined use.
Igneous rock was used to make all of the manos. Possible
sources of the material are igneous pebbles in the stream bed
or out-croppings of igneous dykes that appear at intervals
up and down the Ruidoso Valley.
One fragmentary pestle was recovered from the upper
occupation. It is four and one-half inches long; the grinding
surface measures three and one-half by two and threefourths inches. No mortars were found in the excavation,
but several are reported to be located in the large rocks in
the valley.
Axes. Nine full-grooved axes were recovered. Seven are
made from igneous rock and show signs of usage on the cutting edge. They vary in size and in workmanship. The smallest axe is four and three-fourths inches in length and shows
good workmanship. The largest axe is crudely made; it is
six and one-eighth inches long and four and one-fourth
inches wide and two and one-fourth inches thick. It has
been roughly peeked into shape, but the form is irregular.
One axe has been made from a mano, and merely had the
groove added. The best made axe is of a fine-grained rock
that is green in color (Plate 13, k). The blade shows no sign
of use and the axe is well-shaped.
Arrow-sha]t tools. The seven arrow-shaft tools from this
site are of a uniform type. Each has been made from a small
~welloshaped mano .and has a single groove running transversely across the upper surface (Plate 13, h). The lower
surface of the shaft tools is fiat and well-ground. The speci-

The Bonnell Site

109

mens average four and .one-fourth inches in length, three
inches in width, and two inches in thickness. The grooves
are uniformly made, being one-half inch in width and onefourth inch in depth.
Most of the arrow-shaft straighteners previously described
in the literature are much more elaborate. The site which
has yielded arrow tools most similar to those at Bormell is
the Bradfield Site in the Lower Tularosa Basin, where most
of the tools have one or two transverse grooves.
Hammerstones. No accurate count of the hammerstones
was kept; however, sixteen were noted. They are fashioned from battered nodules of igneous rock and are of
various sizes and shapes, showing heavy usage on the
various prominences (Plate 13, I).
Paint Palettes. Fourteen palettes were recovered, and
these occur in three distinguishable forms. One form is a
flat, unshaped stone slab that has adhering particles of red
and yellow ochre. This type averages six and one-half inches
in length. Another form is a shaped stone, with a central
depression two and one-half inches in diameter and onehalf inch in depth at the center (Plate 13, i). Three palettes
show this depression. The other form of palette, of which
only one specimen was found, is a piece of broken El Paso
pottery that had been used to mix yellow ochre.
Stone Ornaments. One stone pendant was recovered. It is
one and one-half inches in length and one and one-fourth
inches in width. It has an engraved human face in inverted
position and a hole for suspension at the top (Plate 15, A, a).
A turquoise pendant is three-fourths inch long and onehalf inch in width (Plate 15, A, d). It is light blue turquoise
with golden matrix, such as is found at Oro Grande, which
is in .the lower Tularosa Basin eighty miles southwest of
Bonnell. Four discoidal turquoise beads, as well as two small
masses of unworked turquoise, were also recovered.
One stone bead is made of a pink stone; it is three-fourths
inch in length, and is in the shape of a comma. A hole for

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

suspension is in the larger end. Two discoidal beads of
purple fluorite were found; they measure only one-fourth
inch in diameter. One small unworked mass of the material
was also present. These beads were associated with other
discoidal shell beads, and a Conus tinkler in House 8.
Miscellaneous Objects o] Stone. Three unidentified stone
objects are made of a stone that is not native to the mesa,
and thus were obviously imported. Each of the three specimens shows crude workmanship. They are in the shape of
an elongated rectangle with a cross-section measuring about
one and one-half inches square. One of these stones is
eleven and one-half inches in length (Plate 13, m), while
the other two are about four inches in length. Similar objects have been found ia the lYlimbres sites, but they are
usually made. It has been suggested that they are ceremonial s~ffs.~
One grooved ball-like object was encountered (Plate 13,
b). It is two and one-half inches long and two inches in
diameter. Around the center is a groove about three-fourths
inch wide and one-third inch deep. Its use is undetermined,
although it could have been used ~in a handicraft, such as
weaving, to weight a ball of yarn.
Fifteen granite pebbles were found. They vary from
three-fourths to two inches in diameter (Plate 13, e). Those
which show use could have been used in polishing pottery,
while others may have been gathered because of the varied
and attractive colors of the pebbles.
Chipped Stone
Scrapers. Twenty-four scrapers were present. Approximately two-thirds of these scrapers are side scrapers (Plate
13, a), while the others are end scrapers (Plate 13, c). The
largest scraper has a width of three and one-half inches,
while the smaller retouched flake scrapers measure one to
one-half inches. One scraper has a sharp graver point at
one end.
9.

Conversation with Mere, Santa Fe, 1950.

P L.ATI’; 15
A. Ornament-,t of shell. I~one, turquoi.~e, anti pottery from
tery typc~ of Bonnell Site.

Bonnell Site:

IL Pot-

The Bonnell Site

113

Gravers. Four gravers were recovered. All are small
flakes, averaging one and one-fourth inch in length, with
a sharp projection on one side.
Drills. Five stone drills were found (Plate 13, f and g).
The largest is two and one-half inches long.
Projectile Points. Ninety-five projectile points were recovered at Bonnell (Plate 14). Materials used in making the
points are white opal, chert, chalcedony, flint, Alibates flint
from the Canadian River of Texas, red jasper, and obsidian.
Most of the points are made from flint and chert. White
opal, jasper, and obsidian are found in only one or two
points each. They may be classified on a basis of form as
fonows.
Form
No. ol Point~
Triangular
4_........
Long triangular point
with indented base .__ 4........
Side-notched
55 ....
With concave base ............20 ........
With convex base ............. 21 .......
With straight base ............. 13 ...........
And base-notched
1
.21
Corner-notched
.24
Broken

Key to Plate 14
a

g
f, k, 1, m, n, p
q, s
C, t

r, u
e

b, d, h, i, j, o, v, w, x

The triangular point is one-half inch wide at the base and
one inch in length. It is made of flint (Plate 14, a). The four
long, narrow triangular points with indented bases vary in
length from three-fourths inch to one and one-half inches.
All exhibit fine chipping. White opal and obsidian are the
materials used in these points (Plate 14, g).
Side-notched points with concave bases measure from
three-fourths to one and five-eighths inches in length and
are three-eighths to five-eighths inches wide at the base.
Side-notched points with convex bases vary in length from
one inch to one and one-half inches and are one-half to threefourths inch wide at the base. All of these are made of flint

Texas ~rcheological a~d Paleontologica~ ~oc~etN

and chert. The side-notched points with straight bases usually exhibit fine chipping. In length, they vary from one and
one-fourth to one and three-fourths inches. When the three
varieties of side-notched points are grouped together, they
form the most numerous group of points found at the site.
Only one basal fragment of a side and base-notched point
was found. The base is one-half inch wide; the length cannot be determined (Plate 14, e).
Corner-notched points vary a great deal in size, shape and
workmanship (Plate 14, b, d, h, i, j, o, v, w, x). The smallest
point of this form is seven-eighths inch long and nine-sixteenths inch wide at the base (Plate 14, b) ; while the largest
is one and three-fourths inch long and one inch in width
(Plate 14, x). One Perdiz point was found (Plate 14, j) ; this
type is from the Big Bend of Texas.lo The asymmetrical
point (Plate 14, b) is common near Dimmit, Texas, but is
unreported elsewhere.l I
Objects of Bone
Bone Awls. Fifty-two bone awls were recovered from the
Bonnell site (Plate 17, b, c, and d). These include splinter
awls, split bone awls, and awls made from deer ulnae. They
vary according to size and the amount of work expended on
each. The largest awl is six and three-fourths inches long,
(Plate 17, c), while the average length is about four inches.
Several of them show an unusual amount of shaping and
polishing. For example, the awl in Plate 17, d is very slender,
having a diameter of one-fourth inch, is highly polished, and
both ends are shaped to a point. One fragment of an awl has
three light yellow bands running transversely around the
tip.
One split-bone awl is of particular interest. The proximal
end of this awl is carved to represent a human head with a

The Bonnell Site

115

mountain sheep head-dress (Plate 17, b). It is five inches
long and one and one-half inches wide at the broadest point,
and three-eighths inch thick at the top. The eyes are not
fashioned alike. On one side, the eye is diamond-shaped,
while on the other side it is roughly circular. Green stains
appear on both sides of the awl, and could have been caused
by copper oxide or some chemical action in the soil. In southeastern New Mexico this is the only object that has been
reported which shows a combination of human head and
mountain sheep crown. However, the mountain sheep motif
is known in the Penasco valley on a bodkin-shaped objectlz
in the Tularosa Basin on stone figurines,’3 and it is also reported in the Chupadero country to the north.’4 This awl
was found on the floor of House 1, which is the largest and
deepest pit house.
Needles. One bone needle was recovered. It is two and onehalf inches long, has a spherical head at one end, and the
opposite end is sharpened to a fine point.
Punches. Three antler punches were found. They each
show a great deal of use (Plate 17, j).
Gaming Sticks. Thirty-one gaming sticks were recovered.
There are two sizes of elongated oval sticks; one is about
one and one-half inches long (Plat6 17, 1), while the other is
three-fourths inch long (Plate 17, g). Both are usually onefourth inch wide. Three round gaming sticks have a diameter
of one-half inch. Each has a depression in the center of one
side that is about one-sixteenth inch in diameter (Plate
17, f).
Agricultural implements. There are three hoes made from
bison scapulae. These vary from seven to nine inches in
length (Plate 17, 1). Bone hoes have not been reported from
the immediate area, but stone hoes are found in the Tularosa
Basin at the Alamogordo Sites.1~ The scapular bone hoe is

12.
1~.
14.
15,

Jennings, 1940, p. 9.
Lehmer. 1948, 1~. 69.
Personal conversation with Mera, 1950.
Lehmer0 1948, p. 66.

116

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

common on the Southern Plains. One implement which is
seven inches long, and is also made of bison scapula, shows
longitudinal marks ~long one edge, as if it had been used
with a sawing motion (Plate 17, k).
Miscellaneous objects oj~ Bone. Two tubular bone beads
were found which are three-fourths inch long and onefourth inch in diameter. They show signs of polishing (Plate
17, a, g). A turkey leg bone whistle is three inches long with
an opening midway on one side (Plate 17, i). One spatulate
smoothing object was recovered (Plate 17, e). It is made
from a split long bone and shows a great deal of usage.
One unidentified object was made of a hollow long bone
(Plate 17, a). It is six inches long and three-fourths inch in
diameter. The bone has two longitudinal slits on one side.
Encircling lines are engraved at both ends and at the center.
To my knowledge, a similar object has not been reported
previously. It could hardly have functioned as a flute. Other
uses have been suggested, such as a hair ornament or some
type of weaving implement. This object was found in the
center of a group of rocks in association with a bone smoother (Plate 17, e) and a clay pipe.
Objects of Shell
Shell was used entirely for making ornaments. A number
of different shells were used. Mussel shells from the local
streams are utilized most, but specimens of GIycemeris,
Conus, and OIivella are also used.
Olivella shells are strung as beads (Plate 15, B, h). Of the
two hundred and twenty-seven OIivelIa beads found, two
hundred and twenty-three were associated with one burial;
this burial was a child who had a burial offering of a five
strand necklace of these beads as well as a "killed" Chupadero Black-on-White bowl.
Mussel shell was used for twenty-one ornaments of varied
shapes (Plate 15 B, c, d, i, j, k, 1, m, and n). Some of these are
well worked with the rough exterior removed to give a fin-

PLATI*; 16
OlIa anti bowl tyi~e~,

t~onne||

The Bonnell Site

119

ished appearance, while others are rough and relatively unshaped. One of these shell ornaments is roughly rectangular;
it. is one inch long and one-third inch wide. It is similar in
size and Shape to the bone gaming sticks, and could have
been used for the same purpose (Plate 15 B, d).
Two roughly triangular objects are made of a shell that is
three thirty-seconds of an inch thick. One is one and onefourth inches long (Plate 15 B, i), and the other is threefourths inch in length (Plate 15 B, k). Neither have a hole
for suspension.
In six instances, shell ornaments are engraved (Plate 15,
B, c, j, m, n). Four of these are in animal form, two representing fish (Plate 15, B, c), and one an animal such as a
prairie dog or a squirrel, and the other some type of fowl
(Plate 15, B, j). Two of these ornaments have holes drilled
in them so that they might be suspended as pendants.
Only one bracelet was found, and it is of the usual GIyce~neris variety (Plate 15 A, b). It was made by removing the
central part of the shell and grinding the remaining ring and
the hinge smooth. By-products of the manufacturing process
are absent, except for the local mussel shell, which encourages the belief that at least part of the work was done elsewhere.
A Conus shell tinkler was present. It is three-fourths inch
in length and one-half inch wide at the base. It has a small
hole drilled near the top for suspension.
Twenty discoidal beads were encountered, and the type
of shell used to make them cannot be determined. They are
small, having a diameter of one-eighth to one-fourth inch.
Food
Evidences of food at the Bonnell Site are meager, but
there is enough data to furnish an outline of the diet. Charred maize was found, although not in large quantities.
cause of the sedentary nature of the culture represented,
maize was probably an important food. The maize has rather

120

Tezas Archeological and Pa[eonto~ogica~ Society

slender cobs with small kernels; the row number is low,
usually six or eight. "From the total excavation only about a
quart and a half of charred maize was recovered. Most of
this was small and badly broken. Only one place at Bonnell
had any concentration of charred cobs, and here there were
ten cobs on a burned section of a flQor. The remainder of the
corn cobs were scattered throughout the excavation.
No beans or squash were found, although they were probably in use, because they are generally associated with the
maize complex in the Southwest.
Certain wild plants were probably gathered and used.
Seeds of the pitahaya ~were found. The pitahaya is a cactus
(Lema~reocereus thurber~) with an edible fruit. Charred
walnut sh~ells were also present.
Animal bones are plentiful. Most of the animal bones were
broken and some were split. The following animals were
identifie~ bison, deer, wolf, coyote, squirrel, jack-rabbit,
and turkey1 ~
Food was supplied by both hunting and agriculture. Since
agricultural remains are scarce, it seems that hunting was
more imp~rtant; however, there are too few projectile points
to permit the supposition that these people had a hunting
culture. It must be kept in mind ihat no refuse heap was
located, and hence a great deal of evidence is not available.
Burials
At the Bonnell Site burials are placed between houses or
under floors in graves only deep enough to accommodate
the body. Skeletons are in a flexed position on the side or
back with no particular orientation of the head in any direction. Grave offerings are rare, although they are occasionally present in the form of Olivella beads or ceramic burial
bowls.
16. A sample collection of animal bones was
th~ Texas Memorial Museum, Universi~, ~f Texas,

identified by Eugene C. Meat of

The Bon~eH ~te

121

Fifteen individuals were encountered in the excavation,
of which only three were adults. The others vary in age
from infancy to adolescence. Most of the skeletons are well
preserved, the bones being articulated and in the position in
which they were buried. Burials 4 and 14 were located under
floors. Burials No. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 were
between the houses.
Burial 1. This grave contained two individuals, both of
whom are children (Plate 18, c). One child is under six,
while the other is approximately, twelve. Both of the skeletons had apparently been in a flexed position; the exact
position could not be determined because of the disarticulated nature of the bones. The alignment of the grave is
north an_d south, and the grave measured forty inches in
length and twenty-five inches in width. A skull was located
at each end of the grave, and the bones of the bodies were
overlapped. Both skulls contained several body bones. In the
northern skull were sixteen vertebrae, several ribs, and a
scapula. This skull is also of interest because it has large
parietal foramina (Plate 18, a). These foramina are located
about one inch above the lambdoid suture, and measure
about one-fourth inch in diameter. This burial was located
west of House 7.
Burial 2. This

grave contained two children, one of whom

was about six years of age and the other only a few months
old (Plate 18, b). The burial had a north-south alignment,
and measured thirty-five inches in length and eighteen
inches in width. Both bodies lay on the back, with legs
flexed and arms extended, and the heads oriented to the
north. There were no grave offerings with either child. The
vertebral columns of the two individuals were in a straight
line, and there was a distance of seven inches between the
skeletons. The burial was placed northeast of House 10.
Burial 3. This was an incomplete burial of a child about
six years of age (Plate 18, d). The position of the body at:
the time of burial could not be discerned, since the bones

122

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological Society

were not all present and were disarticulated. The alignment
of the grave was east and west, with the head to the west.
Burial 4. This is a single burial of a child placed on the
back with knees flexed. The alignment of the grave was east
and west, and it measured sixteen inches in length and ten
inches in width. The head was to the east. Grave offerings
included a small Chupadero Black-on-White bowl that was
placed over the face, and a strand of Olivella beads that had
been placed around the neck and over the chest of the individual. The Chupadero Black-on-White bowl is five and onehalf inches in diameter and rather crudely made. It had
been "killed" by knocking a small piece from the center of
the bottom of the vessel. The Olivella beads had four or five
strands. This burial was located under a house that is not
plotted because of the incomplete excavation. The floor had
been cut through, indicating that the burial was made at
the time of occupation.
Burial 5. This single burial contained a child between four
and six years of age. The grave was aligned east and west,
with the head to the east. The skeleton lay on its right side
with the legs flexed. The bones of the body had been badly
crushed, particularly the ribs. Burial 5 was located just east
of House 8, as was Burial 6.
Burial 6. This child was placed in a grave with an eastwest alignment. The body was almost fully flexed on the
left side. Orientation of the head was to the east. The skull
and rib cage had been crushed. This burial was located nine
inches to the north of Burial 5, and interment had been from
the same occupational level.
Burial 7. A foetus was located in a small grave with an
east-west alignment. The grave pit measured only seveh
inches in length and three and one-half inches in width.
The bones were so small as to be difficult to identify, and
the position of the body was not clearly discernable, although it appeared to have been flexed.

The Bonnell S~te

125

Burial 8. This was the burial of a child. Grave alignment
was east and west, with the head of the individual oriented
to the west. It contained one burial offering, a large Three
Rivers Red-on-Terracotta bowl, which had a diameter of
ten inches, and which had been placed over the face of the
child. Most of the body bones were missing, and those present were in a poor state of preservation.
Burial 9. Burned fragments of an infant skeleton were
found scattered throughout an area which measured thirtysix inches from north to south and sixteen inches from east
to west. The bones were broken and none of the skull was
recovered. Small discoidal beads were found scattered in
the surrounding soft. This is the only cremation found at
Bonnell.
Burial 10. An adult male was interred in this grave, which
had a north-south alignment. (Plate 18, e). The body was
placed on the back with legs flexed over the chest and arms
folded across the chest under the legs. Occipital deformation
is evident on the skull. Pathological bony growths are present on the skull, but no other bones of the body exhibit this
pathology. A large projection of bone is present on the lower
right parietal. A similar growth, although smaller, is on the
left parietal. The inferior external Occipital ridge shows an
abnormal projection. There are small growths in the facial
region, especially one on the nasal bone.
The skull is asymmetrical, the right side being larger.
There are two Wormian bones in the lambdoid suture, which
were presumably caused by the deformation. The sagital
suture had become obliterated in one small area; however,
the suture is very marked for the rest of its length. The
teeth are all present and contain no cavities. They show a
great deal of wear, especially on the incisors which are
shovel-shaped. All of the teeth have been worn down to an
even surface. Judging from the skull and teeth, the individual was probably thirty years of age at death.
Burial I1. This grave, which contained an individual of

126

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

advanced age, was oriented north and south, with the skull
to the north. Only the skull and some of the long bones were
present, and they were in a poor state of preservation..
Bur~.a! 12. The skeleton of a young child was found in this
burial. Body bones were scattered over a grave approximately three feet and fourteen inches wide. Orientation of
the grave was north-south, with the head to the north. The
body had been placed on the back, and was probably flexed;
however, the body bones were so scattered that the actual
burial position was undiscernable. Associated with the body
was a worked bone splinter three inches in length, a charred corn cob with eight rows, and pottery sherds of Chupadero Black-on-White and Heshotauthla Glaze.
Burial 13. A young adult female had been buried in a
flexed sitting position, in which the arms were crossed
over the pelvis and the knees drawn up against the chest.
The body faced east. The skull was not found; however, it
is probable that the skull had been uncovered by erosion
and was picked up by passing pot hunters. The scapulae
were located only three inches below the present surface of
the ground. A broken Chupadero Black-on-White bowl was
found in the fill around the shoulders of this female, indicating that she may have had a burial offering over her
head.
Burial 14. A child approximately five years of age had
been placed under the corner of the floor of House 4. The
grave was roughly two feet square; and it had been dug
into the native gravel that underlies the floor of this house.
Position of the body was on the back in a highly flexed position. The body was aligned north and south with the head
to the south. There are no grave offerings associated with
this burial.
Burial I5. This was a child about five years old found six
inches below the surface just east of room 9.

The Bo~e~ ~ite

12~

Co~el~s~o~
The Bonnell site was evacuated between 1350 and 1450.
This is shown by the presence of Rio Grande Glaze I and
the absence of Rio Grande Glaze II, which would have
reached the area by 1450. The opening date of the site cannot
be definitely established at the present. A fairly long occupatioh is indicated by the depth of .the fill, the superimposition of houses, and by the fact that to date, none of the
datable trade pottery has been recovered from the earliest

houses. A beginning date of c~ca 1200 is suggested.
The culture of the Bonnell inhabitants was sedentary, with
the economy depending on both agriculture a~d hunting.
Possibly there was some emphasis on hunting. Pit houses
at the site show a tendancy to become shallower toward the
end of the occupation. The earliest pit houses were between
fourteen and twenty-two inches in depth, while the later
ones were progressively shallower, until the most recent
houses were built on the surface or in a depression only
three inches deep.
The Bonnell Site belongs to the Jornado Branch of the
Mogollon~v. Geographically, the site is located on the northern periphery of the Jornado. In time, it falls into the San
Andres Phase of the Northern Area. Due to a lack of published material for sites in the Northern Area of the Jornado,
the material trait list is indefinite. The Bonnell Site has the
cultural complex that would be expected from a general
knowledge of the archaeology of the area; this site will contribute to a more detailed definition of the material culture
of this phase.
This site is very close to the line Where Pueblo and MogolIon influences meet. Some traits present at the Bonnell Site
having a southern or Mogollon origin are the pit houses,
brown ware pottery, and burial customs. Traits with a
Pueblo origin are the Chupadero Black-on-White pottery
full-grooved axes and the rock walls. While the Bonne11
The d~|nit~on of th~ are~ and the phs~m a~moc~ated with Jornado ar~ defin~
Lehrner. 1948.

128

Texa.~ Arch~ological and Paleontological Socie~

site shows this mixture of traits, it is predominantly of
southern origin. However, other sites within a fifty mile
radius that fall within the same time range have a much
stronger Pueblo influence18. When enough of these sites
have been excavated, there will be an excellent basis for
a study of the effect of the contact of the two cultures.
External contacts are indicated by the intrusive ~tems.
Trade pottery comes from northern Chihuahua, the Gila
area of southern Arizona, the Mimbres and Tularosa areas,
and from the Rio Grande pueblos. Alibates flint is from the
Canadian River of Texas; and the bison implements possibly have a Texas Panhandle or South Plains origin. Contact with the Texas Big Bend is indicated by the Perdiz
projectile point. Turquoise is present from Oro Grande to
the Southwest. Olivella beads are from the coast. Trait similarities and mutual intrusives would further suggest contacts with these contemporaneous cultures.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alves, Eileen E.
"A Small Ruin in New Mexico," Bulletin o] the Texas
Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume 4, 1932, 11.40-43.
"Pottery of the E1 Paso Region," BuIIetin o] the Texas
ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume 3, 1931, pp. 57-59.
"Shelter Caves of the E1 Paso District," Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume 2, 1930, pp. 64-68.
Bailey, Vernon.
Li]e Zones and Crop Zones o] New Mexico, U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Biological Survey, Washington, D. C., Government Printing Office, 1913.
Bradfield, Wesley.
"Excavation in the Sacramentos," El Palacio, Santa Fe,
For example, Fall Ranch ~t Capitan, and Bloom Mound at Roswe]l.

PLATE

The Bonnell Site

131

New Mexico, School of American Research, Volume
XXXVII, No. 1-7, 1929, pp. 3-6.
Cosgrove, C. B.
Survey Made For the El Paso Archaeological Society,
1925, Files of the Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas, Unpublished.
Haury, Emil W.
The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico,
Globe, Arizona, Gila Pueblo, Medallion Papers No. XX,
1936.
Holden, W. C.
"Excavation of Saddleback Ruin," Bulletin of the Texas
ArcheoIogicaI and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume V, 1933, pp. 66-68.
Jennings, J. D.
A Variation of Southwestern Pueblo Culture, Santa Fe,
New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical
Series, Bulletin No. 10, 1940.
Kelley, J. Charles.
"Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures in Western Texas," Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Abflene, Texas, VoN
ume 20, 1949, pp. 89-114.
"Excavation of a Presidio Pithouse," El Palacio, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, School of American Research, Vol..
XLIV, No. 10, 1939.
Lehmer, Donald J.
The Jornado Branch of the MogolIon, Tucson, Arizona~
University of Arizona, University of Arizona Bulletin,.
Volume Xl’X, No. 2, Social Science Bulletin No. 17, 1948.
Lewis, Thomas I-I.
"Some Artifacts From the Tularosa Basin of New Mexo.
ico," El Palacio, Santa Fe, New Mexico, School of Amer-ican Research, Volume 57, No. 7, 1950, pp. 198-203.
Mera, H. P.
An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern anti
Southeastern New Mexico, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Lab~

132

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

oratory of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No.
11, 1943.
Chupadero Black-on-White, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No.
1, 1931.
W. S. Stallings, Jr.
Lincoln Black-on-Red, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No..2,
1931.
Population Changes in the Rio Grande Glaze Area, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical
Series, Bulletin No. 9, 1940.
"Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New
Mexico," Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 51, 1938.
Roswell Archaeological Society.
Field Notes From 1932 to 1950, Roswell, New Mexico,
Roswell Museum. Unpublished.
Stallings, W. S., Jr.
El Paso PoIychrome, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory
of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No. 2, 1931.
"Notes on the Pueblo Culture of South Central New
Mexico and in the Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas," American
Anthropologist, N. S., Volume 34, No. 1, Menasha, 1932,
pp. 67-78.
Stubbs, Stanley.
"Preliminary Report of Excavations Near La Luz and
Alamogordo, New Mexico," El Palacio, Santa Fe, New
Mexico, School of American Research, Vol. XXIX, No. 1,
1930, pp. 3-14.
Watson, Virginia.
"The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect," B~.dletin
o~ the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Lubbock, Texas, Volume 21, 1950, pp. 7-68.

SANDALS OF FEATHER CAVE
W~. B. RoosA
Feather Cave is a large limestone cave six miles east of
Capitan, in Lincoln County, New Mexico.

It is on the

shoulder of a hill north of the Rio Bonito 500 yards from
U. S. Highway 380.
The cave faces to the sousth, with the long axis running
north and south. The entrance, once much larger, has
partially filled up with spall rock from the ceiling and
debris from outside so that it now slopes down sharply into
the cave proper. The cave measures 240 feet by 61 feet in its
greatest dimensions. It has a high ceiling which has been
blackened by early fires and stained by the action of groundwater. The rear of the cave is strewn with large rough
boulders from the ceiling. The central portion is fairly level
and the fill is relatively rock free.
Excavations were started late in the summer of 1950, and
resumed in the summer of 1951. The 1950 excavation consisted of an east-west trench across the cave at the widest
point. The 1951 excavation was a trench rn_nning north and
south for 90 feet, with an east-west trench meeting it at the
south end to form a reversed capital "L". The 1950 and
1951 east-west trenches converged at the south end of the
north-south trench.
The excavations were conducted under the auspices of
The Field School of the University of New Mexico, and were
directed by Dr. Paul Reiter. Nine students participated in
the 1950 session, while twenty-one were present in 1951.
While the cave has not yet been fully excavated, it is felt
that a preliminary report on sandals is of value, especially
since it is possible that new types were found.
The sandals are of a close weave wicker work, and with
one possible exception are made of yucca. They fall into
the two general classes: Four Warp of which there are 8
complete specimens, 20 semi-complete, and 16 fragmentary;
and Two Warp with 10 complete, 30 semi-complete, and 25

Texas Archeo~og~cal and Paleontolog~ca~ Society

FIGURE
Sandal tyl)es, Feather Cave.

Sandals o:~ Feather Cave

fragmentary specimens.

135

In addition there are 5 amorphous

specimens not readily assignable to either category..
Type 1: Two Warp Toe Sandal~38 complete or semi-complete, 25 fragmentary.
Narrow whole leaves of yucca form the warp, weft, and
ties of this type. The specimens analyzed (No. 581, No. 582)
have nine leaves in’each warp element.

This number varies

from eight to ten, but the basic pattern is the same. (See
Fig. 6, 1). The upper four leaves with wide ends at the
heel run full length, while the five lower ones, with wide
ends at the toe, leave the body of the sandal to form the side
tie straps. The wide ends of the warp leaves extend beyond
the heel and toe and are shredded forming heel and toe
buffers.
Two pairs of upper warp leaves, one from each element,
are joined in a knot across the toe. The remaining pair from
each side is looped around the first pair, leaving the short
ends extending up to form part of the front ties. Weft
elements of two-three leaves each are introduced through the
loops in the warp, with the short ends forming the rest of the
front ties. The five lower warp leaves are added to each
side and are secured by looping the wefts, one at a time,
under and over the opposing warp bundle. The wide ends of
the weft leaves are shredded and brought out on the bottom
of the sandal, forming a pad on the underside.
The regular weft elements of four to six leaves each are
added one at a time. They differ from the first two in that
the small ends are not anchored in the warp, but remain
free on the upper surface of the sandal. Each weft element
starts and ends on the opposite side from the one preceding
it. They are not interwoven, however, the wide butt ends
cross each other on the sole, each one being tucked up under
the preceding one.~

I. Since toe oonstr~ctlon eerves as a means of class~ficatlon, the author has
start~l ~e d~ptions at the ~e. However. Jt s~ms qu[~ likely tha~ the w~t
s~ f~m the ~ttom, and t~t ~th two and four warp ~pes we~ s~ at t~
h~l and ftnish~ at the ~.

136

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Heel treatment varies. In eleven of the fourteen specimens with nearly intact heels, strands from the opposing
warp elements are joined in a square knot, two are tightly
wovdn with no knot, and one is finished with a square knot
in the last weft.
The ties of the seventeen specimens with nearly complete
sets follow the general pattern of a toe loop and side straps,
none of sandals has any form of heel straps or ties. On all
specimens the elements of the toe loop (four or five leaves
each) are terminated in a large square knot. Toe loops are
centered and are for the second and third toes. Each side
tie separates into two straps which loop around the toe loop,
terminating in one or two large square knots. (See Fig 6,
4 and 5). Counting the toe loop knot, three sandals have
two large knots in the ties; three more have two knots (actually one and a half knots, since the side straps do not form
a complete knot) bound together with the loose ends of both
knots; ten sandals have three separate knots, while one has
three knots bound together. Side ties consist of from four
to six leaves each, nine sandals having five, eight with six,
and three with four.
Structurally the specimens of this type are nearly identical, however, they vary somewhat as to size and shape.
Sandal No. 775--Plate 19A, a. This is a large sandal, 8.7"
long, 1.8" wide at the toe, 2.8" at side straps, and 1.8" at the
heel. It is symmetrically tapered about the long axis. The
heel is finished by joining warp strands in a square knot.
There are four leaves in each side and toe tie element and
two large knots in the ties.
Sandal No. 19~--Plate 19A, 6. This sandal is smaller,
6.6" long, 1.6" wide at toe, 2.5" at side straps, and 1.1" at
heel. There are four leaves in each side and toe tie element,
and two knots in the ties. The taper is symmetrical about
the long axis, and it appears to be for the right foot. There
is no knot at the heel.

Sandal No. 783---Plate 19B, a. From its general appearance
and the cake of mud on the sole it is apparent that this sandal

Sandals o:~ Feather Cave

137

was worn in wet weather. These sandals tend to lose form
and disintegrate when wet, which would account for its unusual shape.

It is 6.3" long, and 4.2" wide at widest point.

There are five leaves ir~ each side and toe tie element, and
two knots bound together in the ties.
Sandal No. 748---Plate 19B, b. This sandal is small, 5.1"
long, 1.7" wide at toe, 2.5" at side straps, and 1" at heel.
Taper is symmetrical about the long axis..Most of the ties
are missing. A two element twisted cord of cotton or milkweed fiber (probably the latter) has been fastened to the
stub of one of the front ties. This sandal is further distinguished by virtue of its having been chopped in two by
the author’s shovel.
Sandal No. 437--Plate 19C, b. This is a large sandal with
little taper, 7.1" long, 2.8" wide at toe, 3.5" at side straps, and
2.9" at the heel. It has five leaves in each side and toe tie
element and three knots in the ties. The sandal is relatively
wider than those previously mentioned. It may not be a
complete sandal since the heel ends of the warp elements
appear to have been broken off. Strands from the warp
elements are joined in a heel knot. These sandals are weak
in the heel, since all show signs of wear there, and 17 are
nearly complete except for the heel. It is quite possible that
the original heel of this sandal broke off and that the heel
knot is a "field repair." If it is complete, it represents a
legitimate subtype.
Sandals of this type are more or less symmetrical about the
long axis. A few are markedly asymmetrical and may have
been intended as lefts and rights. All specimens show signs
of wear, especially at the heels. In a few, some of the weft
leaves are shredded. Since not all of the weft leaves are
shredded in any sandal, this may be the result of wear and
aging, rather than a deliberate process.
All of the specimens fall in the size range of sandals 194,
and 775. The term "Toe Sandal" is used because of the
nature of the ties. However, it is apparent that some of the
larger ones are at least three-quarter, if not full length.

138

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontologica~ Society

Type 2:

Asymmetrical Two Warp Toe Sandal--Plate

19C, a.
This type is represented by one specimen, No. 527.~

It is

the largest sandal in the collection, 9.5" long, 2.5" wide at
toe, 3.5" at side straps, and 1.5" at heel. It is markedly asymmetrical about the long axis, and appears to be for the left
foot. It differs structurally from type 1, in the toe construction.

(See Fig. 6, 2).

There are seven leaves in each side

tie, and four in each toe tie element.

The ties are joined in

two knots. The heel is finished with a knotted weft leaf. It
was found at a depth of 12 inches.
Type 3: Two Warp Toe Sandal--Not Illustrated.
This type is represented by one specimen, No. 278, found
at 8 inches. It is incomplete, and shows no evidence of ties
There is no pad on the sole and no toe or heel buffer. It is
large, 7.2" long, 3" at toe, and 2" wide at heel; and appears
to be made of very wide leafed yucca or grass. The specimen is too fragile to permit dissection.
Type 4: Four Warp Fishtail Toe Sandalm26 specimens
complete or semi-complete, 16 fragmentary.
This type of sandal has a great deal in common structurally
with types 1, and 2. All three types have: 1. Eight fulllength warp leaves, four of which form part of the front
ties; 2. Eight to ten warp leaves which form the side tie
straps; 3. Two weft elements which form part of the front
ties; 4. A pad on the sole formed by wide ends of weft;
5: Heel and toe buffers formed by wide ends of warp leaves;
and 6. T’ney share the same types of ties and knots.
Lefts and Rights are not identifiable in type 4. Each warp
element consists of two leaves with wide ends at the heel.
The outer warp elements are joined in a square knot at the
toe. The inner warp elements cross over the toe (entwined
about each other) so that each goes to the opposite side,
then over and under the outer warp and up to form part of
the toe tie. (See Fig. 6, 3.)

PLATE 19
San,la| tyD~,

Feather C~ve.

Sandals o] Feather Cave

141

Warp elements of four or five leaves each are added under
the inner warp elements.

The first two wefts (two leaves

each) form part of the toe ties, and anchor the bottom warp
elements in much the same way as in types 1 and 2.
In most cases ties are identical with the two warp sandals.
(Fig. 6, 4 and 5.) Ties consist of a toe loop and side straps.
The toe loop is well centered and is for the second and third
toes. Of the nine sandals with more or less complete sets,
four have the two knot tie, two have three knots, two have
two knots bound together, while one (No. 444) has two
knots bound together and a third free knot.
In most cases the side straps enter the body of the sandal
on the bottom between the middle and outer warp elements.
Including fragmentary specimens, ten sandals have braided
ties. The braid is a flat four element braid or sennet.
Heel treatment varies slightly, especially in the degree to
which the warp ends cross over each other. (See Plate 19,
D and E.) Warp elements are not tied together at the heel
as in some of the two warp sandals, however, the last weft
leaf is woven tightly around the warp elements (See Fig.
6, 3.)
Sandal No. 154---Plate 19D, c. This is a fairly large
specimen, 5.5" long, 2.7" wide across origin point of toe ties,
3.6" maximum, 2.7" at side straps, and 1.2" at the heel. It
deviates from the norm in that the side straps enter
the body on the upper surface rather than the sole. The ties
terminate in two knots.
Sandals No. 732--Plate 19D, a and b. These two small
sandals were found together and may be a pair. One is
4.4" long, 2" wide at toe, 2.6" maximum, and 1" at heel;
while the other measures 4.2" long, 2.4" wide at toe, 3.2"
maximum, and 1.4" at the heel. Ties are identical, both
having two knots bound together.
Sandal No. 438--Not Illustrated. This specimen measures
5.5" long, is 3.2" at maximum width, and 1.1" at the heel.
The toe of this one varies from the norm in that only

142

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the outside right warp follows the pattern and terminates
in the front knot.

The right middle warp goes over and

under the outside warp and comes up to form part of the
right half of the toe loop. The left side of the toe foilows
the toe construction of Cosgrove’s type lc2 in that the left
inside warp terminates in the front knot, while the outside
warp becomes part of the left half of the toe tie loop. The
ties employ three knots.
Sandals No. 441 and 445. These are pictured in Plate 19E
to show the range of size in the type. There are several
fragmentary specimens which if complete would be larger
than No. 441, however it is the largest nearly complete sandal of this type. It is 6.9" long, while the small one is 3.8"
long.
Sandal No. 524 Plate 19F, b. The heel is missing from
this one. It measures 6.1" long, 2.9" wide at toe, 3.9" maximum, and 3.3" at the ties. It is distinguished by having
braided ties, and the fact that the right side tie enters the
body of the sandal on the sole, while the left enters on the
upper surface between the inside and outside warps. Since
the specimen is incomplete, we hesitate to assign it to a
different class or subclass. Sandals of this general type
were found by Cosgrove3 and Howard4, and in Isleta Cave,
a Basketmaker III Site 11 miles east of Isleta, New Mexico,
by Reiter. Cosgrove’s specimens are similar in outline, but
not in structure.
Type 5: Four Warp "Half Sole" Toe Sandal--2 specimens.
Sandal No. 195--Plate 19F, a. This specimen is 4.4" long,
2.7" in maximum width, and 2.6" wide at the heel. Toe
construction follows closely that of type 4. The essential
differences in the two types are in the heel treatment, and
the ties. Weft strands are prevented from sliding off at the
heel by a square knot joining strands from the inner warp
elements. The side ties of this type are not part of the warp
2. Cosgrove, 1947. Figures 87, 88.
3. Cosgrove, 1947, Figures 87. 88, ~YPes la, and
4. Howard, 1930, Plate XXXIV, 2.

Sandals o] Feather Cave

143

elements, but rather are separate leaves which are looped
around the outer warp elements. The ties consist of a toe
loop and side straps, and terminate in two knots which are
bound together.
Sandal No. 151mNot Illustrated. This is quite similar to
No. 195, however it is incomplete, lacking the toe. The heel
differs in having three small square knots uniting strands
from all four of the warp elements instead of one knot.
This sandal was found at 14", while No. 195 was at 24".
A very similar sandal is illustrated by Howard5, and one
was found recently by a student in a cave near Hot Springs,
New Mexico. Cosgrove equates Howard’s sandal to his type
lb. However, the toe construction of our specimen does not
agree with Cosgrove’s drawing. Since Howard does not
analyze his sandal, it is impossible to say that our specimen is identical.
The sandals were found at depths of 1" to 51~/2 inches in
loose, dry fill, disturbed in places by rodent holes. Of the
100 specimens of types 1 and 4 assignable to a specific level,
70% were at or above the 18 inch level, while 84% were at
or above the 24 inch level. Roughly 50% of the sandals were
at or above the 12 inch level.
The one specimen of type 2 was at 12 inches, while that of
type 3 was at 8 inches. The two specimens of type 5 were
found at 14 inches and 24 inches. It is possible that types
2, 3 and 5 represent later developments than types 1 and 4
both of which were found as deep as 51 inches.
Comparison of types 1 and 4 shows 68.3% of type 1 at or
above 18 inches, as opposed to 75% of type 4 at the same
level. In type 1, 80% are at or above 24 inches, while 90%
of type 4 are at the same level. Distribution of the two types
is fairly even, with type 1 having a slightly higher percentage in the lower levels.
There is little evidence on which to base a sequence of
types. In type 4 sandals, those with braided ties occur only

Howard,

1930.

Plate

XXXIV,

I.

144

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

in the first 18 inches. This might indicate that braided ties
are a recent development in this type of sandal.
Two and four warp yucca leaf sandals with sole pads
formed from the wide ends of the leaves are fairly common
in the Southwest; ranging from northeastern Arizona to the
Big Bend Area of Texas. Tos sandals have been found
as far north as Jemez Cave% however, they are most common in the Big Bend and Hueco areas of Texas and" New
Mexico.~
A two warp toe sandal common to this area has been designated "Fish-taft" by Roberts,8 Smith,9 and others. Many
of the sandals of this type are roughly obovate with a round
toe and a "Fish-tail" heel. Jackson pictures a specimen
from Culbertson County, Texas which is more rectangular
in shape, and closely resembles our types 1 and 2.
Cosgrove found several types of fish-tail sandals in the
Hueco Mountain Area. His type 4a is rectangular in outline, while type 4b has a more obovate shape. Both types
have warp elements which leave the body of the sandal to
become side straps--a feature shared by our types 1, 2, and
4. Our types 1 and 2 most closely resemble Cosgrove’s type
4a in shape and structure, however, they also show a close
structural relationship to type 4b, but lack the obovate shape.
In outward form our types 1 and 2 also resemble his types
2 and 3. These differ from ours in toe construction and
have ties which are separate elements.
The obovate two warp "Fish-tail" sandals are very similar
in shape and construction to our "Type 4, Four Warp Fishtail Toe Sandals." Our type 4 shows much greater similarity
in shape and structure to Cosgrove’s type lc. As has been
noted, toe structure of the two types is different while heel
treatment is similar, but not identical. All of our specimens
(of types 1, 2 and 4) are unique in having weft elements
which form part of the toe loop. While this may occur in
6.
7.
8,
9,
10.

Alexander and Retter, 1935. p. 59.
Saylcs. 1935. Table 8.
Roberta, 1929, Plate 2,
Smith, 1933~ Type ta, Plate 13. No.
Jackson, 19370 Plate 31. :No. 2.

Sandals o:~ Feather Cave

145

the specimens of Robert, Smith, Cosgrove and others, it is
not mentioned or shown.
CONCLUSIONS
Sandals of types 1, 2 and 4 are of a general type common
to the Big Bend and Hueco areas. They show most marked
resemblances to sandals found in the Hueco Mountain district and along the Rio Grande north of E1 Paso by Cosgrove
and assigned by him to the Hueco Basket-maker culture.
Type 5 is similar to ones found by Howard in Guadalupe
Mountains, and assigned to a Basket-maker culture. Type
3, if it is a valid type, has not been analyzed to permit valid
comparisons.
From the sandals, the proximity of the sites, and other
associated artifacts found in the cave, it appears that Feather
Cave represents a site of the Hueco or Hueco Basket-maker
culture. Lehmer has defined the Hueco as the earliest phase
of the Jornada branch of the Mogollon.l I
The problem of whether we call the culture "Hueco
Basket-maker" or "Hueco Phase of the Jornada Branch of
the Mogollon" appears largely to be one of definition of
terms. If we restrict the term Basket-maker to a culture on
a certain technological level in the San Juan area, we are
wrong to call them Basket-makers; the same of course applies to like use of the term Mogollon. If on the other hand
we use a broad definition for the terms Basket-maker and
Mogollon we may be quite justified in applying either term
to this area without necessarily implying close relationships
to other areas.
BIBIAOGI~HY
Alexander, H. G. and Reiter, P.
(1935) "Report on the Excavation of Jemez Cave, New
Mexico," Monographs of The School of American Research, No. 4. Santa Fe.
Cosgrove, C. B.
(1947) "Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in
11.

Lehmer

1948. po 7Io

146

Texas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Society

New Mexico and Texas," Papers of the Peabody lYluseum, Vol. XXIVmNo. 2. Cambridge.
Howard, E. B.
(1930) "Archaeological Research in the Guadalupe
Mountains," University of Pennsylvania, Museum Journal, Vol. 21, Nos. 3 and 4, pp. 184-202. Philadelphia.
Jackson, A. T.
(1937) "Exploration of Certain Sites in Culbertson
County, Texas," Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Bulletin, Vol. IX, pp. 146-192. Abilene.
Lehmer, D. J.
(1948) "The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon," University ef Arizona Bulletin, Social Science Bulletin No. 17,
Vol. XIX, No. 2. Tucson.
Roberts, F. H., Jr.
(1929) "Recent Archeological Developments in the
Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas," Smithsonian Miscellaneous
Collections, Vol. 81, No. 7. Washington.
Sayles, E. B.
(1935) "An Archeological Survey of Texas," Medallion
Papers, No. XVH. Globe.
Smith, V. J.
(1933) "Sandals of the Big Bend Culture with additional
notes concerning Basket-maker evidence," Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Bulletin, Vol. V,
pp. 57-65. Abilene.

POTTERY OF THE RIO BONITO AREA OF
LINCOLN COUNTY, NEW MEXICO
As a more thorough archaeological picture is constructed
in the Southwest, the remaining gaps become increasingly
apparent. One of the areas about which knowledge is most
scant is that with which this paper is concerned. An attempt
will be made herein to place the culture of the area in context (with regard to relative chronology and association
with contemporary developments)

by means of ceramic

types, both native and trade, found in the area.
The material was collected in connection with the University of New l~Iexico Field School during the 1950 and
1951 seasons from sites along the upper reaches of the Rio
Bonito in the vicinity of Fort Stanton, New Mexico. Several
sites in adjacent territory are also represented in an attempt
to widen the view of developments in the area.
The eight sites in the Bonito valley, from east to west
(see map), hereafter referred to by number are:
(1) Lincoln Rock Shelter--a small rock shelter near
Lincoln.
(2) Double Crossing Ruin Ma pueblo-type ruin with
wall bases in evidence, between the Fort Stanton
cutoff and Lincoln.
(3) Stanton Ruinma ruin of the same type as (2) near
U. S. 380 on the Fort Stanton Reservation, east of
the cutoff.

(4) Feather Cave--a large cave on the shoulder of the
hill directly across the valley from (3).

(5)

Upper Bonito Site I--a site with possible wall remains on the Stanton Reservation, three miles west
of the hospital.

(6) Three Post Site--a site apparently of pithouse type,

148

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FIGUI~E "/

Potte~ o] the Rio Bonito Area

149

being cut by an arroyo near three large posts west

of (5).
(7) Upper Bonito Site II--a site with no structural evidence, 6 miles west of the Fort Stanton Hospital.
(8) Upper Bonito Site III--a small site with one ceramic type in evidence, two miles west of (7).

The majority of the sites lie between 150 and 200 yards
from the river, 1, 2, 4, and 6 on the north side, and 3, 5, 7,
and 8 on the south.
Included sites not in the Bonito Valley are:
(9) Petroglyph Site--a pueblo-type site with wall bases
clearly in evidence, about four miles north of Bernardo Gap.

(I0) Mesa Ranger Station Site---a site without evident
structural remains west of the station, arroyos are
cutting the site on two sides.

(11) Fred Pfingston Site--a large site west of (10) with
possible remains of wall structures in the westerr~
portion and definite pithouse remains in the east,
it probably includes two separate settlements, each
on its own hill.
Sites 9 and 11 are much larger than any of the Bonito developments while 10 conforms more to their average size,
Miscellaneous mat.erial was collected from sites on the
Morris and Padilla ranches between the Bonito and the,
base of the Capitan Mountains.
The sites are all in the Sacramento Highlands east of
Carrizozo and would be included in the "Highlands" care-.
gory in the survey by, Stallings’. It is a hill country of grass
alternating in less favorable locales with juniper and, in a
well watered spot, with clumps of larger trees and lush
undergrowth, indicatir~g the fertile potentials of the area.

1.

Stallingz, 19S2.

150

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FIGURE 8
Pottery perccntage~ from Rio Bonito Sites,

Pottery o] the Rio Bonito Area

151

The first comprehensi.ve report on the complex in which
this area is included was by Stallings in 1932; previous to
that time reports2 had been published on separate wares and
types found in single sites with little attempt at correlation.
Roberts in 1929 described a "very sandy dark red ware with
decoration in dull black", extending from the E1 Paso district north and west and dating, on the basis of Mimbres
evidence, from the Great Pueblo period. In 19313 this was
named "El Paso Polychrpme". The .same year the predominant black-on-white ware of the region was designated
"Chupadero Black-on-White’’4 and the black-on-red as "Lincoln Black-on-Red"~. Stallings’ report listed two types of
native ware, Chupadero Black-on-White and the E1 Pasotype brownwares. Lincoln Black-on-Red and Three Rivers
Red-on-Terracotta were classified as variants of Northern
Rio Grande wares, both the wide and narrow line. varieties
of the latter and glaze variants of the former were mentioned. His conclusions were that this was a Pueblo ceramic
district, designated "El Paso", with native brown and blackon-white wares, influenced by Mimbres and Casas Grandes
developments, and occupied from .early Pueblo HI to early
Pueblo 1-V times, after which the population withdrew to
the north.
Sayles6 refers to dates of 1310-1330 and 1345 for E1 Paso
Polychrome and associates it wiih Chupadero Black-onWhite, Lincoln Black-on-Red, Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, Mimbres, Chihuahua, St. Johns, and Gila Polychrome
in the E1 Paso phase. In the J~uman.o phase to the southeast
of the E1 Paso he lists a basic red-on-brown complex including buff, grey, and brownish wares, plain and decorated
with broad and narrow red lines, occurring in both bowl and
jar forms. The paste is coarse, tempered with sand and
gravel, and the surface frequently floated.
2.
Alva, 1931, 1932, p. 42. Mera. 1931. Mera and Stallings, 1931. ~, 1929,
S~]in~s, 1931.
~,
S~llin~. 1931.
& M~ 19Sl.

5,

Me~ and S~in~s, 19~I.

6.

S~I~, 1935, v~. ~2-7~, 78-79. Table 7.

152

Texas A~’cheo~ogica~ and P~eontologica~ Societal

Mera7 lists the brownware as originating in the 1Vlogollon
area, with eastern variants possessing thicker walls than
the Alma types, light colored angular temper, and in some
cases a red interior slip. In work on Jackson’s8 ceramic material from caves in Culbertson County, Texas, Mera found
Chupadero Black-on-White underlain by E1 Paso wares, the
lowest sherd being of El Paso type paste with a red interior
slip. He states that these wares are all "roughly contemporaneous" (50-100 years), and gives the closing date for blackon-red in that area as 1350. In a later publication9 he reports
Chupadero, E1 Paso, Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, and
Rio Grande Glaze Polychrorne east of the Pecos in southeastern New Mexico. In the Saline-Medano district to the
north of the area vJi~h which we are concerned he finds!o
San Marcial Black-on-White, Mogollon Red-on-Brown, Socorro Black-on-White, and M_imbres Black-on-White as intrusive wares, with E1 Paso Polychrome, Chupadero Blackon-White (from Socorro Black-on-White), and a corrugated
brownware as the native developments. The native brownware is said to possess a peculiar temper and much of it is
indistinguishable from E1 Paso Polychrome paste. The corrugated ware is thought to be the result of Pueblo influence
on the basic brownware. In his last publication on the area, ’
Mera points out the existence of Jornado Brownware, a
coarsened derivative of Alma Plain in the southern part of
his "brownware district" (as opposed to Saline-Medano in
the north). He gives a plausable derivation o5 Three Rivers
Red-on-Terracotta from San Francisco Red. He lists the
earliest dated sherds in the area as three specimens of 1Vfogollon Red-on-Brown from three separate sites. He also
states that all intrusives in the north were of Pueblo derivation although’ black-on-white wares from this source were
absent. The latest of these intrusiv~s was Agua Fria Glaze-

7. Mere, 1948.
8. A, T. Jack,on, 1987, pp. 152-154.
9. Mera. 1938.
10. Schole~ and Mera, 1940, pp, 291-299.
II,
Mer~ 1943.

Pottery of the Rio Bonito Area

153

on-Red, which was introduced shortly before the abandon.ment of the area.
Toulouse12 states that the brownware found in early levels at Pueblo Pardo in association with Chupadero Blackon-White and a redware similar to San Francisco Red
is almost indistinguishable from Alma Plain.
Krieger’s reports Chupadero, E1 Paso, and Lincoln Blackon-Red occurring with Glaze I and Glaze III in one Llano
Estacado site and Chupadero and E1 Paso Brown with Glaze
II, Glaze III, and Potsuwii Incised at the Antelope Creek
Site.
Later references have been made to the high percentages
of E1 Paso Polychrome (90%) in a site adjacent to the city
of E1 Paso14 and to the occurrence of all types mentioned
by Sayles, plus corrugated, scoured brown, and Little Colorado black-on-white wares in the area east of E1 Paso,4A.
Jennings, in 1940’~, stated his belief that the brownware
of this area is part of a Mogollon development. This was
crystalized a few years later by Lehmer~, who designated
it as the Jornada Branch of that culture and divided the
territory into a northern and southern area, each of which
passed through three phases as follows:
North
1400
1300 San Andres
1200
1100 Three Rivers
1000 Capitan
900

South
E1 Paso
Dona Ana
Mesilla

Hueco
The Capitan phase ~includes the earliest pottery types in
12.
13.
14.
14A.
I$.
16.

Toulouse, 1944, p. 73.
Krieger, 1946.
Moore. 194~/, ~p. 104-109.
Smith. 1936, pp, 104-109.
Senning~, 1940.
Lehmer. 1948.

154

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the area with which we are concerned, they are, polished
Jornado Brown, Broadline Red-on-Terracotta, and in rare
instances, Mimbres Boldface. The Three Rivers Phase includes Jornado Brown, E1 Paso Polychrome, Three Rivers
Red-on-Terracotta, Mimbres Black-on-White, Mimbres Corrugated, Chupadero Black-on-White, and some St. Johns
Polychrome. The San Andres Phase is characterized by
E1 Paso Polychrome and Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
accompanied by Lincoln Black-on-Red, Chupadero, Gila
Polychrome, Ramos Polychrome, Playas Incised, Agua Fria
Glaze-on-Red, Arenal Glaze Polychrome, St. Johns Polychrome, PIeshotauthla Glaze Polychrome, and smudged corrugated.
With this data we find that a generalized picture of the
southeastern New Mexico area includes a basic brownware,
sometimes similar to Alma Plain, accompanied in degrees
by Chupadero Black-on-White, E1 Paso Polychrome variants, and a group of painted redwares, which in some cases
appear similar to the northern Rio Grande types. Chupadero is apparently a derivative of the northern black-onwhite tradition. Most of the material appears to coincide
in time with late Pueblo III and early Pueblo IV developments to the north. Using this. as a background we approach
the specialized developments of the Rio Bonito area.
Virtually all material recovered was from surface collections, the few stratigraphic samples obtained being either
too small or too homogenous to be of value in correlation.
Sites 4, 6, and 8 (see chart) contain an overwhelming
percentage of brownware, large amounts of which have
been polished. The sherds are divisable into E1 Paso Brown
and a coarse variety of Jornado Brown, with the latter
occuring in the highest percentages. Alma Plain and Alma
Scoured are also in evidence. Parts of two small vessels of
coarse polished redware were found at site 6. The crudeness
of form and rough finish over which a polishing stone had
been rubbed would suggest an individual experiment, had
not parts of two vessels of the same obvious type been

Pottery of the Rio Bonito Area

157

found. Nothing similar was encountered on any of the other
sites. Decorated wares from these sites are confined to one
sherd of the fine-line type of Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta with an unsmoothed exterior (in contrast to the normal smoothed) found at site 6.
Site 1 seems to represent a transitional stage, since while
containing a large majority of brownware with Jornado
Brown dominant, it also yielded Chupadero Black-on-White,
Broadline Red-on-T~rracotta, and ~1 Paso Polychrome.
Sites 5, 7, and 11 are dominated jointly by Chupadero
Black-on-White and brownware which occur in more or
less equal quantities, together forming about 70% of the
sherds from each site. Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta is
present at all three, the highest percentage occurring at
site 11 which is closest to the type site. E1 Paso Polychrome
is also present at a~ll three sites, though in two of them
it does not attain one per cent. Corrugated ware (the
smudged corrugated of Lehmer) is found only in site 7,
suggesting a time relationship. Lincoln Black-on-Red also
occurs only in site seven.
Site 10 falls out of the range of the above in that the percentage of Chupadero Black-on-White is about 15% less
than their average, while that of E1 Paso Polychrome rises
from less than one per cent to over.15% of the total content.
The percentage of corrugated ware is also markedly higher,
while that of Lincoln Black-on-Red is less noticeably so. The
ratios of brownware and Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
remain about the same.
The remaining sites, 2 and 3, can be classified in one
group characterized by the dominance of corrugated ware
over the relatively minor occurrence of both plain brown°
ware and Chupadero Black-on-White, the two of which,
when combined, in neither case equal over 25% of the total.
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta is all but absent. Lincoln
Black-on-Red shows a substantially higher percentage than
it does in any of the other groups as does E1 Paso Poly-

158

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

chrome (except at site 10 where the higher percentage may
be due to the relative proximity to the source of the E1 Paso
wares).
We therefore have three main categories of sites and two
transitory examples which can, with increasing difficulty as
they become more recent, be fitted into Lehmer’s northern
Jornado classification; the first with the Capitan, the second
with the Three Rivers, and the third with the San Andres.
The contradictions and discrepancies with this system are
given below.
In the Capitan Phase of the Upper Bonito we have only
brownware, a few sherds of which show a red wash. None of
the Mimbres types or Broadline Red-on-Terracotta are in
evidence at these sites at the present, although several sherds
of the latter were found in site 1 (apparently next in chronological order) accompanied by variants of Chupadero Blackon-White and the E1 Paso wares, which would tend to place
it in the next phase.
In the sites tentatively assigned to the Three Rivers Phase,
with the exception of the above, we find all of the requisites
present except Mimbres Corrugated. Broadline Red-on-Terracotta is coexistent with Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
(fine-line). Lincoln Black-on-Red and the local smudged
corrugated wares make a sudden appearance in the latest
site of the period. The design elements of the early Lincoln
Black-on-Red assign it definitely to a Three Rivers inspired
origin (see Plate 20). Brownware has begun its decline, E1
Paso influence (i.e. recent influence from the south) has not
been felt to any extent and Chupadero Black-on-White, emanating from a northern source, is at its peak.
The transition between the Three Rivers and San Andres
Phases represented by site 10 shows Chupadero declining in
favor of what must have been a strong wave of influence
from the south bringing E1 Paso Polychrome. The local
wares which had manifested themselves at the last of the

Pottery o~ the Rio Bonito Area

159

Three Rivers Phase continued to improve their status
through the transition and the following San Andres Phase.
This final development, contrary to Lehmer, finds Three
Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta missing from the Bonito Area.
Also in disagreement is the dominance of corrugated ware
rather than E1 Paso Polychrome, which, although present in
increased percentages was by no means dominant; in fact,
it may have been intrusive in this area rather than a native
ware.
The abandonment, in the late 14th century, occurred when
corrugated and Lincoln Black-on-Red wares were at their
peak, the latter giving way to an early glaze ware (Agua
Fria Glaze-on-Red), a ware similar in many ways to the
later forms of Lincoln. As already mentioned, Chupadero
Black-on-White and the plain brownwares were very much
on a decline and Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta had disappeared (the appearance of a few sheyds at site 3 is due to
the extended occupation of this si~e, evidenced also by the
percentage of Chupadero and specific trade material). The
general impression given by collections from these last sites
is one of Pueblo culture.
Trade material is..present in most sites to the extent found
in those reported on by Lehmer. The most useful are the red-on-terracotta types and the early glaze wares. The former
have been dealt with to some extent in the foregoing material, a brief summary of their development follows. A
brownware with a red wash, presumably that which DIera
postulated as ancestral to the series, has a spotty distribution among the sites, occurring in all three phases. Sherds of
this type from the ,later sites appear considerably worn
which may indicate an extended or interrupted occupation
of the site, placing the sherds in an earlier phase than that
by which the site is characterized. The broadline variety of
red-on-terracotta is present to a larger extent in the sites of
the Three Rivers Phase than in the San Andres, where it
occurs sporadically, indicating a somewhat later development of this ware in the Bonito Area than in those to the

160

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

south. In the earlier sites it is difficult to distinguish between examples of this and Mogollon Red-on-Brown ware.
A distinctive type of Broadline Red-on-Terracotta occurs at
site 5 in the form of both bowls and ollas, with a heavily
roughened exterior and interior respectively. It is also characterized by a black core with large, angular crystaline inclusions, all of which brings to mind the red-on-terracotta
wares mentioned by Sayles,7 in connection with the Jumano
Phase of the lower Rio Grande. 0nly a few sherds were
found at the one site of its occurrence. The co-existence of
Broadline and Three Rivers (fine-line) Red-on-Terracotta is
demonstrated at sites 3, 5, 6, and 7. ~11 forms of red-on-terracotta were apparently replaced by Lincoln Black-on-Red in
the San Andres Phase. Further work in the area will clarify
lYlera’s red wash, broad-line, fine-line, black-on-red, glaze
(see Plate 20) sequence.
The Rio Grande Glaze I red ware (Agua Fria Glaze-onRed) is present locally in fair amounts (1-2%) in the San
Andres Phase and, with the more plentiful local ware, Lincoln Black-on-Red, is as excellent a guide to this phase as
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta (fine-line) is to the Three
Rivers Phase. The glaze ware is distinguished from Lincoln
Black-on-Red, which it resembles superficially, by a grey
core, a finer paste, and a sharper fracture. Rims are both
square and round. From the external similarity it is probable that this was replacing the Lincoln ware at the time of
the abandonment of the area. Other glaze wares, mostly
from the Little Colorado occur sporadically as far back as
site 7, where the Lincoln Black-on-Red and smudged corrugated wares first appeared. This may be another case of
extended occupation.
Mimbres Black-on-White wares occur only in Three Rivers
Phase sites, and have their heaviest distribution, as does
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, in the westernmost sites,
which are also those with the easiest access to the trade from
the Mimbres area.
17.

Saylcs. 1935.

Pottery o] the Rio Bonito Area

163

The accompanying chart contains a summation of the material presented above.
A few additional peculiarities with regard to the blackon-white ware of the area deserve mention. One of interest is
that glaze on Chupadero (apparently accidental) occurs in
all sites on which Chupadero Black-on-White is found and
in no definite ratio. The earliest occurrent is at site 1
and the latest at site 3. It is most plentiful at site 9, although probably early San Andres was not included in the
general summary because of its radically high percentage
(for the Bonito area) of Chupadero Black-on-White. This
is presumably due to its comparative proximity to the center
of development of that type. Another development concerning this ware is the early appearance of a number of blackon-white types differing from each other in one or more
ways (finish, rim form, etc.) and yet similar in at least one
respect to the homogeneous Chupadero of later sites. This
would contradict Mera’s origin of Chupadero, although
nothing definite can be stated without work of a stratigraphic nature.
Conclusions
As may be deduced from the high percentages of Chupadero to the north and E1 Paso Polychrome to the south,
closer than 30 miles each way, the culture of the Bonito
Valley was on a borderline, its foundations in the south and
west and its progress toward the culture of the north.
The briefest summation of the ceramic history would
point out a brownware origin stemming from the south and
west with increasing influence from the north’which finally
enveloped all of the earlier traits and left it, at the time
of its abandonment, a full-fledged Pueblo ceramic development. The situation is best demonstrated by the sequence of
red wash- on- brown, to Broadline Red- on- Terracotta, to
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, to Lincoln Black-on-Red
with a fine-line decorative scheme which degenerated into

164

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological Society

the panel below the rim decoration of the Pueblo black-onred wares, and finally gave way in part to the earliest
Pueblo glaze-on-red ware. This last type apparently arrived
in the Bonito Valley at a date somewhat later than that of
its appearance in the north as evidenced by the tree ring
date of 1310 to 1360 for both Agua Fria and E1 Paso Polychrome in Gallo Canyon.18
This development, while cont~uous, can be separated into
three distinct phases to which the names Capitan, Three
Rivers, and San Andres postulated by Lehmer can be applied with varying degrees of certainty. Somewhere between the Three Rivers and the San Andres Phase the culture of the Upper Bonito crossed the line from an aberrant
~orm which could be associated with Mogollon to a stage
which, ceramically, is indisputably Pueblo. Therefore it is
suggested that the northern boundary of the Jornado be
made more flexible, passing through the Bonito area in the
Three Rivers Phase, and to the south of the Bonito Valley
in the San Andres Phase, leaving the valley in Pueblo territory during the final development.
Lesser developments will help in. establishing the identity
of the people concerned. The first .of these is the influx of
Mimbres ware from about 1100 to 1200, an indication that
some of the population of the Mimbres area abandoned at
that time joined the eastern Jornado branch. There is evidence of this at Site 11 where two separate settlements are
apparent, one area containing high percentages of Mimbres
ware and another much larger are£ containing almost exclusively native wares of the same period. Other evidence
of this sort is the sudden influx of large amounts of E1 Paso
Polychrome in the "San Andres" Phase, whereas only traces
of it had been present up to that time. In the south large
percentages are present in the Three Rivers Phase. This
indicates that in the last stage of northern development the
southern settlements were already being abandoned in favor

18.

Lehmer, 1948.

Pottery o~ the Rio Bo~to A~ea

165

of the north. Cultural influence from this direction had been
steadily weakening for a long period o£ time as evidenced
by the continually increasing absorption and adoption o£
northern traits. It is probable that the Apache entered the
Southeast New Mexico area, which was their stronghold at
the time of the Spanish arrival, through these weaker southern villages, driving some of them to the north, and following up in that direction, eventually eliminated the Bonito
Valley settlements. This final abandonment can be said to
have been completed by 1350, the Gallo Canyon dates to the
north being considered contemporaneous with the abandonment which took place shortly after both Agua Fria Glazeon-Red and E1 Paso Polychrome began arriving in the area
in substantial amounts.
There is evidence that the population may have scattered
to the north (Abo and other pueblos of the Ssline-Medano
district) and west, sherds of Lincoln Black-?n-Red, E1 Paso
Polychrome, and Chupadero having been found on the
Texas side of the Llano Estacado accompanied by Rio
Grande Glazes I and HL
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alves, E. E.
1931. "Pottery of the E1 Paso Region." Bulletin of the
Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society, Vol.
III, Abilene.
1932. "A Small Ruin in New Mexico." Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
IV, Abilene.

Jackson, A. T.
1937. "Exploration of Certain Sites in Culbertson County, Texas." Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogica! and
Paleontological Society, Vol. IX, Abilene.
Jennings, J. D.
1940. "A Variation of Southwestern Pueblo Culture."

166

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series, No. I0,
Santa Fe.
Krieger, A, D.
1946. Culture CompIexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, Univers{ty o] Texas Publications, No. 4640, Aus-

Lehmer, D.
1948. "The Jornado Br~unch of the l~ogollon." University
of Arizona Bulletin, Social Science Bulletin No. 17, TucMera, H. P.
1931. "Chupadero Black-on-White." Laboratory o]
thropology Technical Series No. 1, Santa Fe.
1938. "Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeast New
Mexico." Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 51.
1943. "An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern and Southeastern New Mexico." Laboratory of
thropoIogy Technical Series No. 11, Santa Fe.
Mera, H. P. and Stallings, W. S. Jr.
1931. "Lincoln Black-on-Red." Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series No. 2, Santa Fe.
Moore, Mrs. G. E.
1947. "Twelve Room House Ruin." Bulletin of the Texaz
Archeological and Paleontological Soc{ety, Vol. XVHI,
Abilene.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. "An Archaeological Survey of Texas." Medallion
Papers, No. XVII, Gila Pueblo, Globe.
Roberts, Fo H. H., Jr.
1929. "Recent Archaeological Developments in the Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas." Smithsonian Institution Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 81, No. 7, Washington.

Pottery o~ the R~o Bonito A~e~

167

Scholes, F. V. and Mera, H. P.
1940. "Some Aspects of the Jumano Problem." Carnegie
Institution of Washington Contributions to American
Anthropology and History, Vol. VI, No. 34.

Stallings, W. S., Jr.
1931. "El Paso Polychrome." Laboratory of Anthropol.
ogy Technical Ser~es No. 3, Santa Fe.
1932. "Notes on Pueblo Culture in South-Central New
Mexico and in the Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas." American
Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 67-78, Menasha.
Toulouse, J’ H.

1944. "Cremation Among the Indians of New Mexico."
American Antiquity, Voh X, No. 1, Menasha.
University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque,
January, 1952.

ARCHEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS AT THE
BELTON RESERVOIR, CORYELL
COUNTY, TEXAS~
E. O. MILLER AND EDWARD B. JELKS
Introduction

The Belton Dam, presently under construction by the
United State Army Corps of Engineers, is located on the
Leon River 3 V2 miles due north of Belton, Texas. The reservoir impounded by the dam will extend 17V2 miles up the
Leon and 12 miles up Cowhou~se Creek, the principal tributary. It will function in flood control, and will supplement
the water supplies of Temple, Belt0n, Killeen, and Ft. Hood.
A preliminary archeological reconnaissance of the Belton
Reservoir area was made by Robert L. Stephenson in July,
1949. He located 38 archeological sit~es which will be affected
by the reservoir. Twelve additional sites were discovered
subsequently by E. O. Miller.
Working intermittently ~rom January 18 to March 2,
1951, E. H. Moorman and E. O. Miller completed minor
excavations at the Grimes-Houy shelter (41-39D4-17) and
the Urbankte Site (41-39D4-15). Later, in November and
December, 1951, Miller spent six weeks at the Belton Reservoir working on the Grimes-Houy burnt rock midden (4139D4-19), the Johnson Hole Site (41-39D4-20), and the Horse
Creek burnt rock midden (41-39D4-21). Both Stephenson’s
survey and the subsequent excavations were part of the
Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program of the Smithsonian Institution, the National Park Service, the U. S.
Army Co_rps of Engineers, and the Bureau of Reclamation.
This program, designed to salvage archeological material
endangered by dam construction, has been supervised by
the River Basin Surveys--a unit of the Smithsonian InstitutionNunder the direction of Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr.
¯ Permission for the publication of this ]paper has been kindly ~rant~d by the
Searetary of the Srnithsonian Institution.

Archeological Excavations a~ the Belto~ Reservoir

169

After the activities of the River Basin Surveys at Belton
had been terminated, additional excavations at some of the
same sites were undertaken by Mr. D. B. Hill, an amateur
archeologist of Moody, Texas. The material he recovered
was included in the tabulations and analyses of this study.
M.r. Hill’s cooperation in lending his specimens for analysis
and photographing is gratefully acknowledged.
Special acknowledgment is due Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas archeologist, who exhmined all the artifacts,
identified the Caddoan pottery types, and pointed out similarities between some of the lithic artifacts and their counterparts in the Caddoan area.
AnaIys~s o~ the Artifacts
Three fundamental steps were employed in anlyzing the
material from Belton. First, the artifacts from each site were
separated into classes on a basis of supposed functional design: i.e. they were classified as knives, awls, arrow points,
dart points, etc. Then, wherever possible, each class was
further sub-divided into types.. Many specimens fell inte
previously recognized typological categories; others require~t
new definition. The newly-defined types are presented here
as tentative ’groupings and will probably require revision as
additional data are gathered through future research. The.
third step in the analysis consisted of plotting the distribu-.
tion of the various classes and types, and seeking to recog-.
nize affiliations between groups through associations, one’
with another, within the sites.
In order to separate the artifacts into classes, it was neces-.
sary to draw certain arbitrary lines of definition, especially
for the chipped stone implements: these are explained here
to minimize confusion on the part of the reader.
Broad-bladed, stemmed implements--unless the stem was’
set at an inappropriate angle--were considered to be projectile points. Included also in the projectile point class were.
triangular-shaped blades of such size and shape as to suggest
their use on projectiles. Those implements with one smooth~

the Be~to~ Rese~oi~

171

unworked face were classified as scrapers, except for a few
specimens whose form compelled their inclusion with the
projectile points or drills. Thin, sharp-edged blades flaked on
both faces were classified as knives, while the thicker,
cruder blades with edges unsuitable for cutting purposes
were simply designated blades. Implements with very narrow, pointed blades were put into the drill category, and
those with short, sharp, beak-shaped projections were called
grave~
The term blade refers to any relatively flat implement
worked on both faces; it is also used to designate the body
(as distinguished from the stem) of a projectile point, or the
long, sharp-edged projection of a drill. The stem of a projectile point, drill, or knife is the projecting "tab" by which the
implement was presumably halted. The base of any implement is the bottom-most edge. The word base is also used to
indicate the broad, non-blade portion of a drill.
Stone ArtiSacts
Projectile Points
Differentiation between arrow and dart points on a basis
of size and technique of manufacture is now a generally accepted practice among North American archeologists. This
dichotomy was followed in analyzing the Belfort material,
the light, th~n, finely flaked specimens being designated
arrow points while the heavier, thick, crudely chipped ones
were classified as dart points. Although an occasional point
of intermediate size and design might have been either a
heavy arrow point or a light dart point, most of them fell
naturally and conveniently into one of the two categories.
Descriptions of the projectile point types follow: ~
Ellis Stemmed. (Plate 22, 1). This type, previously described by Krieger (Newell and Krieger, pp. 166-7), is a
1. Type names preveded by an asterisk were first recognized by J. Charles Kelley,
University of Southern ~llinols archeologist, but most of them have not been previously
d~cribed in l>rint. Kelley’s type names ar~ used here.

172

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

relatively small dart point characterized by an expanding
stem and strong shoulders. Ellis occurs over most of the
eastern portion of the United States in Archaic and Woodland sites as well as in many later complexes. A minor type
at Belton, it was found both in Edwards Plateau Aspect and
in Central Texas Aspect components.
Ensor Stemmed. (Plate 22, 2). This is the writers’ name
for a provisional dart point type of distinctive design occurring in large numbers in most sites in the Belton area. The
most prominent characteristic is a strongly expanding stem
with a straight or convex base, the lateral extensions of the
stem usually being approximately in line with the blade
edges. Ensor resembles Ellis Stemmed, but differs from it in
these respects: the expansion of the stem is sufficient to
bring the stem corners flush with the blade edges, a small
notch is frequently present in the middle of the base, markedly concave blade edges are common, the blade edges are
sometimes serrated, and Ensor is generally longer, thinner
and of more slender proportions than Ellis. While Ensor and
Ellis possibly are variations of a single type, in the writers’
opinion each has enough individuality to warrant a separate
designation. After having examined a number of private
collections from Central Texas, the writers believe that
Ensor Stemmed, together with type Darl Stemmed, described below, are affiliated with both the Edwards Plateau and
Central Texas Aspects.
Yarbrough Stemmed. (Plate 22, 3). Twenty-four points
from five sites were classified as Yarbrough Stemmed
(Newell and Krieger, p. 168), a relatively slender, mediumsized dart point, with slight shoulders and a parallel-sided
stem. Bases range from concave to convex and the stems are
frequently smoothed along the edges. This is a dominant
dart point type at the Yarbrough Site, Van Zandt County,
Texas, and is part of the late pre-pottery complex there. It
is also present at the Davis Site, type site of the Alto Focus,
in Cherokee County. Its principal affiliations appear to lie

PLATE 22
Stune dart p~llnis.

I.

EJI|~ S|emmed;

2.

Enter Stemmed:

3.

Ynrbr~u~h

Stem-

Archeological Excavation~ at the BeIton Reservoir

175

with the late pre-pottery cultures of east Texas, with continuation as a minor type into the pottery horizon.
Gary Stemmed. (Plate 23, 2). Gary (Newell and Krieger,
p. 166) is a barbless, shouldered dart point with a characteristic contracting stem. It is widely distributed over the
Southeastern area at both pre-pottery and pottery levels.
The two Belton specimens were found at the Johnson Hole
Site.
Darl Stemmed. (Plate 23, 1). This small, slender dart point
with a beveled blade is present in large numbers in the
Central Texas Aspect and Edwards Plateau Aspect components in the Belton area. A few examples were found at
the Yarbrough Site during excavations there by the University of Texas, and were classified by Krieger (personal communication) as a variant of the type Yarbrough Stemmed.
Darl is similar to Yarbrough in general outline, having
slight shoulders and a parallel-sided stem, but differs from
Yarbrough in its beveled blade, complete absence of stemedge smoothing, and in the semi-serrated effect--resulting
from fine pressure flaking along the edges of the blade-of most specimens. The present writers believe that this
style of point represents a significant depart.ure from the
Yarbrough motif, consequently they have considered it a
separate type. As with the type Ensor Stemmed, however,
Darl Stemmed is introduced as a provisional type. Its final
disposition must await broader distributional and associational studies than have been made to date.
*PedernaIes Indented Base. (Plate 23, 3-5). This point is
the principal diagnostic element of the Round Rock Focus
(Kelley, 1947b; Campbell). Fifteen specimens were recovered at Belton, eleven of them from the burnt rock midden
at the Johnson Hole Site. PedernaIes is a large dart point
with a characteristic bifurcated stem and a triangular blade.
There is considerable variation in general proportion and
outline between individual specimens.
*Nolan Beveled Stem. One dart point of this type was
found at Belton, in the Ament shelter. Nolan is the principal

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica! Socie~

projectile point type of the Clear Fork Focus as defined by
Kelley (Kelley, 1947a), but also occurs in Round Rock Focus
components. It can be easily identified by its square--or
sometimes slightly expanding--stem which is beveled to the
right, its straight base, and slight rounded shoulders.
*Castroville Convex Base. (Plate 23, 6-7). This point occurs frequently in components of the Edwards Plateau
Aspect and is considered by Kelley (Kelley, 1947b, p. 124) to
be a diagnostic element of the Round Rock Focus. The stem
is fairly broad and usually expanding, and the base ranges
through varying degrees of convexity. The shoulders are
well developed, and pronounced barbs are frequent. The
blade is broad with convex edges. Five specimens of Castroville were found at Belton, in three sites.
"Bulverde Barbed. (Plate 23, 8). Three possible BuIverde
dart points were found at Belton. All were in the Johnson
Hole burnt rock midden. This type is distinguished by a
straight base, square or slightly contracting stem, pronounced barbed shoulders, and a short, squat, triangular
blade. It is consistently found in Edwards Plateau Aspect
components in Central Texas, but its focal affiliations are
as yet undetermined.
"Martindale Fishtail. (Plate 23, 9). The one specimen of
this type was recovered at the Johnson Hole burnt rock
midden. Martindale is a thick, broad-bladed point which
occurs in components of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. The
term Fishtail was derived from its most distinctive feature,
the curving lateral stem projections which extend to either
side. The exact cultural affiliations are unknown.
Arrow Points
*Scallorn Stemmed. (Plate 24, 1). This is one of the principal arrow point types of the Austin Focus (K.rieger, 1946,
p. 166). An expanding stem, sharp barbs, and occasional
serrated blade edges are typical features. A number of the
arrow points at Belton possessed the essential form of type
Scal~orn Stemmed but, at the same time, had erratic features

Archeological E~cavat~o~ at the Belfort Reservoir

177

that would have prevented their inclusion within the type
limits as originally defined by Kelley. For purposes of the
present analysis, the limits of variation were extended to
embrace a greater diversity of form than was originally included in the type description. It is probable that future research wflI break down this extended "type" into several
groups.
*Perdiz Pointed Stem. (Plate 24, 2). This is one of the
most numerous arrow point types at Belton. It is widely
distributed in Texas, and is especially well represented in
the Toyah, Austin, Rockport, and Frankston Foci (Kelley,
1947b; Newell and Krieger, pp. 191-2). Light, thin, and finely
flaked, its most distinctive feature is a long, sharply pointed
stem. Long, sharp barbs are also characteristic.
*C!i]]ton Contracting Stem.z (Plate 24, 3). This is a crudely made arrow point with a very small contracting stem and
broad, unbarbed shoulders. A flint Lake of proper shape was
simply roughed into the desired form with little or no attention devoted to detail or accurate delineation. Many specimens retain one smooth, unchipped face and, in cases where
a curved flake was used, a marked degree of curvature frequently survives in the completed point. Cli]]ton is found in
the Harrell Site, type site of the Henrietta Focus, in Young
County, and in most components of the Austin Focus
(Krieger, 1946, p. 115).
*Foyle Flake. (Plate 25, 1). This arrow point lies typologically between Clif~ton Contracting Stem and Perdiz Pointed
Stem. Like Clif]ton, it is made from a small flake, with one
face usually left smooth and unchipped, but it differs from
CIif]ton in having a larger, sharply-pointed stem and in the
fine chipping and clean lines of most specimens. It is sufficiently close in type to Cli]]ton and Perdiz to suggest affiliation with both, and it is probable that future distributional
studies will result in some reshuffling among the three
~. C|iffton was mi~pelled Clinton in Kell~y, 194~b. l~th name~ refer to the ~ame
t~r~e srrow l~oint.

178

Texas Archeo~ogical a~d Paleontological Soci~

types. FoyIe, while far from rare, was not found in abundance at Belton.
Alba Barbed. (Plate 25, 2). This is a small arrow point
with a bulb-shaped stem and concave blade edges which
sweep out to broad barbs. Occasionally the stem edges are
parallel. According to Krieger (Newell and Krieger, pp.
161-2) Alba is widespread in loci of the Gibson Aspect in
the Caddoan area, but does not continue into the later
Fulton Aspect. Seven specimens were found at Belton, four
at the Johnson Hole Site and three at the Ament shelter.
Drills
The drills can be easily separated into two distinctive
categories: large and small. The large ones (Plate 23,
11) are chipped on both faces and are oval in cross-section;
their bases are almost invariably worked into some shape,
usually discoidal, square, or stemmed in th~ manner of
dart points. The stems are usually identical to those of local
dart point types. In contrast, the bases of the small drills
(Plate 25, 4) are irregular-shaped flakes, completely unworked, and the blades frequently have one smooth, unchipped face. The large drills seem to be associated entirely
with the Edwards Plateau Aspect cultures, while the small,
more delicate ones are later and associated with arrow
points.
Knives
It is unfortunate that a detailed study of flint knife types
in Central Texas has never been made. Several forms occur
in sufficient number to suggest that definite types do exist,
but their identification as such is beyond the scope of this
paper. A large-scale study involving thousands of specimens
would be necessary to determine the distinctive characteristics of the separate types and their distributions. Until
such a study has been completed, most of the knives in the
Belton area can be described only in general terms.
The knives are, for the most part, either triangular or
leaf-shaped and have sharp tips. Bases of the triangular

2

9

PLATE 23
Stone dart points and drill~,

1. Dar! Stemmed; 2. Gary Stemmed:

Fishtail; 1~11, Im~e dril~ with worked bas~

All app~xim~tely

~

Archeolo~ica! E~’cavatio~ at ehe Belton Reservoir

181

forms range from straight to deeply concave. In addition
to these, a few four-edged, beveled knives like those associated with the late Plains cultures and several specimens
similar to the Copena type are present. Some of the thin,
sharp implements classified as scrapers would make efficient knives and were probably used for cutting purposes.
Copena knives. A number of knives (Plate 26) were found
which bear a striking similarity to those of the Copena
Focus in Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee (Webb and
Dejarnette, pp. 301-6) and will henceforward be referred
to as Copena knives. This type also occurs in appreciable
numbers in components of the Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan
Foci (Newell and Krieger, pp. 173-4).
Scrapers
Scrapers can be classified as snub-nosed, side, and trimreed flake. The snub-nosed ones are of medium size and are
evidently associated almost exclusively with the Central
Texas Aspect. The other styles are more nondescript and
their affiliations are undetermined. Side scrapers of varying forms apparently were shared by both Edwards Plateau
and Central Texas Aspects, and irregularly shaped flint
flakes, retouched unifacially along one or more edges, occur
in all components.
Grinding Sfones
Manos are present in components of both the Edwards
Plateau and Central Texas Aspects. The deliberately-shaped
ones usually have parallel sides and rounded ends, and both
faces show evidence of use. Others, made from large, unshaped, water-worn quartzite nodules show wear on only
one face.

Limestone and sandstone grinding slabs with round or
oval depressions were used with the manos. No true metates
(i. e. grinding slabs used with back-and-forth motion) were
found.

A small piece of sandstone with several grooves set at
random angles was picked up on the surface at the Urbankte
Site. It was probably an abrading stone or hone used to
sharpen the tips of bone implements.
Pigments

There were small pieces of ochre at all sites. Red ochre
was most common, although a few fragments of yellow ochre
were also found. One piece of red ochre, from the Johnson
Hole burnt rock midden, has a cross-hatched design incised
on one facet, and a number of other pieces from various
sites have worn surfaces where the pigment was scraped off.
Artifacts o] Bone
Pointed Bone Implements
These were found associated with all components and can
be separated into two general styles. One style (Plate 27,
1) was made from a splinter, sharply pointed at one end,
with a smoothed, blunt base. Also included in the splinter
group are a few specimens with rough, unworked bases
(Plate 27, 1). The second, and most numerous, style (Plate
27, 2) retains all or part of the articular surface of a joint
on the basal end. No particular differences in the provenience of the two styles was observed. These implements,
generally supposed to be awls, pins, needles or weaving
tools, were all polished to some extent, especially toward
the distal end.
Flaking Tools (Plate 27, 5 and 9).
These were made from the proximal end of a deer ulna,
with the unworked articular surface and olecranon left as
a cQnvenient handle. The ulna was severed one to three
inches below the "handle" and the tip was smoothed into
a rounded or beveled shape. No other flaking implements
were found, with the possible exception of several fragments of deer antler (Plate 27, 8) which may have been
parts of flakers.

5
PLATE 24
1, Sca|l~rn Stemmed: 2, l)erd|z Pointed Stem; 3. Clifton ~ontr~ctln~ ~em.

All

A~cheo~og~c~l Exc~vati~ at ~he Be~t~ Rese~o~r

185

Tablet-Shaped Objects
Two fiat, rectangular-shaped bone objects of unknown
use were found, one at the Ament shelter (Plate 27, 3), the
other at the Grimes-Houy shelter (Plate 27, 4). Both were
collected by Mr. Hill and both were associated with burials.
Approximately ~ inch thick, they are polished on the outer
surfaces and around the edges. The inner surfaces, smoothed
slightly, still retain a veneer of the spongy, cellular structure found inside mammal bones. The size and shape of
these objects suggest that they were made from flat or long
bones of some large mammal, possibly bison.
Ceramics
Pottery was present at the Urbankte Site, the GrimesHouy shelter, the Johnson Hole Site, the Grimes-Houy burnt
rock midden, and the Ament shelter. Included are engraved,
incised, brushed, punctated, and plain sherds, all tempered
either with bone or clay-grit. No shell-tempered sherds were
found. Many of the plain body sherds probably belong to
vessels with decorated rims, but a few are plain rim sherds
which suggests entirely plain vessels.
Unfortunately, most of the sherds are too small for positive identification as to type. Several of them, however, are
unmistakably Holly Fine Engraved (Plate 29, 1-6), a diagnostic type of the Alto Focus (Newell and Krieger, pp. 8190). A pottery pipe from the Ament shelter (Plate 29, 8) is
assigned by Krieger to the Fulton Aspect--probably the
Frankston, Titus, or Texarkana Focus. The pottery as a
whole appears to be typical of the Caddoan area and undoubtedly represents both the Gibson and Fulton Aspects.
The relative scarcity of potter~] in these sites and the similarity to Caddoan area styles argue against its indigenous
manufacture. It is more probable that all the sherds are
fragments of trade vessels brought in from the east.
Analysis of the Sites
In the following analysis only those artifact types considered diagnostic of previously-defined cultures are dis-

Texa~ A~¢heoloflica~ a~d P~leocttologic~ ~ociety

cussed in detail. The Central Texas loci thus far defined
have been identified and delineated principally on a basis
of projectile point types, consequently they are the only
criteria available for diagnostic interpretation. This situation is urffortunate, for distinctive types could very probably
be recognized in other artifact classes if they should be subjected to thorough analysis; until such analyses have been
made, however, it is necessary to rely chiefly on projectile
point types for interpretation.
Space and time limitations would not permit detailed descriptions of all the artifacts, and since no comprehensive
studies have been made for scrapers, blades, drills, awls,
:[faking tools and so on for Central Texas in general, they
have been largely eliminated from this analysis. A tabulation of all artifacts from each site has been included, with
the intra-site provenience of the specimens recorded whereever possible, and anyone who is interested in correlating
~/~e various diagnostic types with the other artifacts ~rom
the same components can do so by examining these tables.
The cultural affiliations of the artifact types under consideration are as follows:
Edwards Plateau Aspect
Round Rock Focus
Pedernales Indented Base
Castroville Convex Base (?)
Nolan Beveled Stem (?)
Clear Fork Focus
Nolan Beveled Stem
No established focal affiliation
Bulverde Barbed
Martindale Fishtail
Ensor Stemmed (?)
Darl Stemmed (?)
Central Texas Aspect
Austin Focus
Scallorn Stemmed

PLATE 25
Stone arrow i~oints and drills.
1, Foyie Flake; 2, Alba Bacb~d~ 3, triangular
arrow poinL~ found in Auatia Focus component.~ ; 4. small drills with unworked baaed.
All approximately ~ size,

Perdiz Pointed Stem
CliO]ton Contracting Stem
Foyte Flake
Ensor Stemmed
Darl Stemmed
Toyah Focus
Perdiz Pointed Stem (?)
East Texas Archaic
Yarbrough Stemmed
Ellis Stemmed
Gary Stemmed
Gibsoa Aspect
Alto Focus
Yarbrough Stemmed
Wells Contracting Stem
Morrill Stemmed
Ellis Stemmed
Gary Stemmed
Alba Barbed
Copena
Holly Fine Engraved
Urbankte Site (41-39D4-15)
The Urbankte Site is located on the left bank of the Leon
River immediately above its confluence with Horse Creek,
about a mile below ~Iother Neff Park. It is in the southeastern corner of Coryell County on the property of W. A.
Urkankte, and covers an area of 3 to 4 acres.
In December, 1950, Moorman and Miller excavated two
test pits there, each five feet square, and made twelve tests
with an auger. It was determined that the cultural zone lies
at the surface, extending no deeper than 15 inches in any
place,~ indicating an occupation of fairly short duration.

190

Te~’as A’tcheological and Paleo~ologica! Society

Except for potsherds-which are unusually numerous for a
Central Texas site---and two types of stone artifacts, the
artifact assemblage is typically Austin Focus.
Scallorn Stemmed, Cliffton Contracting Stem, Foyle
Flake, and Perdiz Pointed Stem are the dominant arrow
point types; dart point types include Darl Stemmed, Ensor
Stemmed, and Ellis Stemmed. Four knives are probably of
the Copena type.
A number of potsherds were recovered, all seemingly
trade material from the Caddoan area to the east. Tempering
agents are bone and clay-grit, and decorative techniques
include brushing, incising, and engraving. Most of the sherds
are too fragmentary for positive typological identification,
but the ceramic assemblage as a whole is unquestionably
Caddoan. Three sherds are identified as Holly Fine Engraved
of the Alto Focus, Gibson Aspect.
Summary. Because of the shallowness of the cultural zone
and the typological uniformity of the artifacts, the Urbankte
Site is considered to be a "pure" component of the Austin
Focus (Table 1). The presence of Caddoan pottery, Copena
type knives, and Ellis Stemmed dart points in evident association with the Austin Focus material is construed as indicative of trade relationships between east and central
Texas Indians, and the presence of potsherds of the type
Holly Fine Engraved suggests partial contemporaneity of
the Austin and Alto Foci.
Grimes-Houy Shelter (41-39D4-17)
This rockshelter is situated some 600 yards east of the
junction of Horse Creek and the Leon River. It is about
60 feet long, with a depth of 6 to 12 feet and a ceiling height
of from 6 to 8 feet above the present surface. It lies near the
head of a box canyon with walls 20 to 30 feet in height.
Moorman and Miller spent several days excavating in the
Grimes-ttouy shelter in January, 1951. A grid system of fivefoot squares was established and four of the squares were

Archeo~ogical Excavations at the Belton Reservoir

191

excavated to bedrock at an average depth of 24 inches. The
provevAence of the specimens was recorded by square and
depth below the surface. At odd times during the late spring
and early summer of 1951, Mr. D. B. Hill excavated further
in the shelter.
The principal occupation appears to have been by the Austin Focus. ScalIorn Stemmed and Perdiz Pointed Stem are
most numerous of the arrow point types, and both Foyte
Flake and Cli]fton Contracting Stem are also present. Dart
point types include Ensor Stemmed, DarI Stemmed, Ellis
Stemmed, Yarbrough Stemmed, PedernaIes Indented Base,
and Castroville Convex Base. The two latter types are considered diagnostic elements of the Round Rock focus and all
examples of both occurred relatively deep in the site (Table
2). Their presence here may indicate survival of Edwards
Plateau Aspect artifact types into the Austin Focus since
Austin Focus material occurs at the same levels. Ensor
Stemmed and Darl Stemmed are thought to be local manifestations of the Austin Focus. Three four-edged, beveled
knives of the type commonly associated with cultures of the
Plains area were also found.
Artifacts pointing toward contact with the Caddoan area
consist of Ellis Stemmed and Yarbrough Stemmed dart
points, Copena type knives, and fragments of a single pottery vessel. The vessel is very similar to one from the
Clements Site in Cass County which was found in association with European trade material. The fragments were
found by Mr. Hill within a very restricted space and the
vessel they represent was probably grave furniture included
with one of the burials. Since the exact provenience was
not recorded, however, it is impossible to assign it to the
proper one.
No natural stratigraphy was discernable and any typological stratigraphy that may have existed was evidently
disturbed by the numerous graves which were, in most
cases, dug to bedrock. However, the arrow points as a

192

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

group were mostly ir~ the higher levels while the dart points
were generally somewhat deeper.
Twelve burials comprising a total of 17 skeletons were
found, all between the back w.all and a heavy rock fall
running longitudinally through the center of the shelter.
There were eight single, three double, and one triple intermerits. All the skeletons were flexed except for one infant
which was extended on the back. One burial contained a
flat, rectangular bone tablet (Plate 27, 4) which may have
been used as a wrist guard for protection against the slap
of the bowstring, and a plain, polished pendant of mussel
shell (Plate 28, 2). No other burial furniture, with the possible exception of the pottery vessel mentioned above, was
found.
Sum.mary. The Grimes-Houy shelter yielded a quantity of
artifacts identified with the Austin Focus. Three artifacts
attributed to the Round Rock Focus were found in the
lower levels, and the presence of four-edged, beveled knives
suggests contact with Plains cultures. Copena type knives,
dart points of the types Ellis Stemmed and Yarbrough Stemmed, and sherds from one pottery vessel point to a relationship with the peoples of east Texas.
Grimes-Houy Burnt Rock Midden (41-39D4-19)
This midden, located on top of the canyon wall in which
the Grimes-Houy shelter is situated and about 200 feet
northwest of the shelter, is oval in shape with a length
of approximately 50 feet and a breadth of 30 feet. Six
three-foot test squares were excavated in the midden by
Miller in November, 1951. So far as the site was tested, the
maximum depth of the cultural debris is about two feet.
No natura! stratigraphy was apparent.
The artifacts indicate occupation by both the Edwards
Plateau Aspect and the Austin Focus. Dart points predominate over arrow points, with types Dar~ Stemmed, Ensor
Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, and Yarbrough Stemmed being
represented. Arrow point types include Scaltorn Stemmed,

PLATE 26
St~)ne knive~ ~imi!ar to "’Copen~~’ blade~.

AI| approximately ~ ~Ize.

A~cheologica! Exca~atio~ at the Belton Reservoir

195

Perdiz Pointed Stem, and Cliffton Contracting Stem. One
Copena type knife was found, and a number of potsherds
were recovered. The shards, which were found exclusively
in the top twelve inches, all appear to be of Caddoan styles.
Five sherds from one vessel were identified as type Holly
Fine Engraved, and at least two more vessels were represented by a series of brushed and plain shards.
Summary. The frequency of dart points suggests occupa~
tion by the Edwards Plateau Aspect. A few diagnostic
arrow point types indicate a later occupation by the Austirr
Focus. Trade with the Alto Focus is represented by a vessel
of Holly Fine Engraved, the fragments of which came from
the upper one-half of the midden. Other indications of conr
tacts with cultures to the east include one Copena knife and
dart points of the types Ellis Stemmed and Yarbroug~
Stemmed.
Johnson Hole Site (41-39D4-20)
This site (Fig. 10) lies along both banks of Stockton
Branch near a large "pothole" known locally as Johnson.
Hole--a popular swimming place. Two archeological components are present: a dissected burnt rock midden in the
vertical east bank of the, branch and a shallow midden, on’.
the west bank, between the branch and a vertical limestone.
bluff. The burnt rock midden evidently accumulated at a
time when the stream channel ran alongside the bluff, and
was subsequently dissected when the channel migrated lat-.
erally to the east. After the channel had shifted, the area
between its new position and the bluff was built up with.
alluvium, and it is in the upper portion of this alluvial fill.
that the later component is found.
Test E, a 10 by 15 foot rectangular excavated to a depth.
of five feet, was dug in the burnt rock midden by Miller in.
November, 1951. Most of the artifacts recovered are of types
affiliated with the Round Rock Focus and include dart
point types Pedernales Indented Base, Cas~roviIle Convex
Base, Bulverde Barbed, and Martindale Fishtail. Also present were a few Ellis Stemmed dart points and several others:

A~cheo~ogica~ E~cavatio~ a~ the Benton Reservoir

19"/

that may be variants of types Wells Stemmed and/or Morrill
Stemmed (Newell and Krieger, pp. 167-8). One Ensor Stemmed point was found in the upper portion of the midden.
On the west bank, Miller excavated squares A, B, C, and
D, each five feet square. Deposits attributed to the Austin
Focus extend 12 to 18 inches below the present surface.
Mr. Hill later excavated in the same general area. Diagnostic
artifacts from this comI~.onent include arrow point types
ScaIIorn Stemmed, Cli~lton Contracting Stem, and AIba
Barbed; dart point types Darl Stemmed, Ensor Stemmed,
Yarbrough Stemmed, and Ellis Stemmed; one sherd of the’
type Holly Fine Engraved; and two Copena knives.
Test F was excavated by Miller on the east bank above
the pothole, about 350 feet upstream from Test E. It revealed
no trace of the burnt rock midden encountered in Test E.
The cultural material e~xtended to a depth of about 20
inches below the surface and included arrow point types
Scallorn Stemmed and "Perdiz Pointec~ Stem, and dart point
types Ensor Stemmed, Yarbrough Stemmed, and Ellis Stemmed. These types, together with the Shallowness of the
posit, suggest a correlation between this area and the later
component below the pothole.
Summary. Two components are present at the Johnson
Hole Site: a burnt rock midden of the Round Rock Focus
and a later occupation by the Austin Focus. Associated with
the Austin Focus material was a diagnostic trait of the Alto
Focus: pottery type Holly Fine Engraved. Also in association with the same material were Alba Barbed arrow points~~
Copena knives, and dart point types Yarbrough Stemmed,
Ellis Stemmed, Ensor Stemmed, and Darl Stemmed. Ellis
Stemmed and possible variants of WeIIs Stemmed and/or
Morrill Stemmed were associated with the Round Rock
Focus component, and one specimen of type Ensor Stemmed
came from a relatively high position in the same midden.
Horse Creek Site (41-39D4-21)
This burnt rock midden is about 100 yards west of the
Grimes-Houy shelter on the right bank of Horse Creek. The

198

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

creek has cut into the midden so that it is exposed in vertical
cross-section. Resting on a bed of yellow clay and gravel,
the cultural material is visible from 12 inches below the
surface to a depth of 66 inches.
In November, 1951, starting at the vertical face, Miller
excavated a trench five feet wide back into the midden for
a distance of ten feet. The artifacts, which were sparsely
scattered through the midden debris, are unquestionably of
Edwards Plateau Aspect affiliation. One dart point of the
type Pedernales Indented Base was found near the bottom
of the cultural zone, and one specimen of Darl Stemmed
came from near the top (Table 5). The middle portion
yielded one Ensor Stemmed, one Yarbrough Stemmed, and
two Castroville Convex Base points. The other artifacts,
from throughout the entire depth of the midden, were of
Edwards Plateau Aspect forms and styles. No natural stratigraphy was discernible.
Summary. The Horse Creek Site is a burnt rock midden
component of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. One Pedernales
Indented Base dart point was found near the bottom of the
midden, suggesting occupancy by the Round Rock Focus.
Ament Shelter (41-39D4-23)
The Ament rockshelter was not excavated by the River
Basin Surveys since it is not within the reservoir area of
the Belton Dam. It is included here, however, because of
significant parallels betweer~ it and the other sites. It was
discovered and excavated by Mr. Hill. Because of previous
looting only a small undisturbed area remained, and it was
there that Mr. Hill dug.
The indigenous artifacts are typically Austin Focus except for one Nolan Beveled Stem dart point (Clear Fork and
Round Rock Foci) and one Pedernales Indented Base (Round
Rock Focus). Of especial interest was a flexed burial, enclosed in a cist of fiat stones placed vertically on edge, which
contained the following burial offerings: five Perdiz Pointed
Stem arrow points, five or six Scallorn Stemmed arrow

boneAllaPproxll;~ate|ytablets;
5 & 9. l-3deersixe,ulna flaking, tools : 6-7. bone h{-ads ; 8, Polished antler til~

Archeological Excavatior~ at the Belfort Reservoir

201

points, a flat bone "tablet" (Plate 27, 3), and a mussel shell
ornament with notched edges (Plate 28, 4).
Arrow point types from the Ament shelter include ScalIorn Stemmed, Perdiz Pointed Stem, Cli~fto~ Contracting
Stem and Alba Barbed; dart point types are Ensor Stemmed,
DarI Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, Yarbrough Stemmed, Pealerhales Indented Base, and NoIan Beveled Stem. Two Copena
type knives, three obsidian flakes, eleven potsherds (probably from two vessels), and the bowl of a pottery pipe also
came from the shelter. The latter has been identified by
Krieger as a Fulton Aspect form.
Summary. Occupation_ at the Ament shelter is essentially
Austin Focus, with traces of the Round Rock--or possibly
Clear Fork--Focus. A pottery pipe fragment indicates probable trade between the Austin Focus and northeast Texas
in Fulton Aspect times. Alba Barbed arrow points, Cope~a
knives, and Ellis Stemmed and Yarbrough Stemme~ dart
points also link the site with cultures to the east. Contact
With the Southwest is suggested by the presence of three
obsidian flakes.
Synthesis and Conclusions
Indigenous occupation at the Belton sites can be identified
with the Edwards Plateau and Central Texas Aspects. The
Edwards Plateau Aspect is characterized by a lithic complex
of relatively large dart points, knives, blades, scrapers, drills,
and other classes of artifacts in a variety of forms. Several
specimens considered diagnostic of the Round Rock Focus
were found, all in lower occupational levels.
The areal distribution patterns of the two dart point
types Ensor Stemmed and Darl Stemmed, so far as they are
known at present, indicate a comparatively localized development. Since both were found in the Horse Creek site, a
component of the Edwards Plateau Aspect with no Austin
Focus material, they probably came into existence before
the end of the aspect.

202

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The Central Texas Aspect components are all considered
to represent the Austin Focus. The writers’ conception of
this focus is somewhat different from that of previous investigators and requires some explanation here.
Krieger (1946, pp. 165-168) and Kelley (1947a and 1947b)
originally defined the Austin Focus as a protohistoric and
early historic culture, probably to be connected with the
Tonkawa tribes. The principal diagnostic element was the
arrow point type Scallorn Stemmed. Other traits were snubnosed scrapers, four-edged beveled knives, crude side scrapers, notched bison ribs, Oliva-shell beads, triangular conchshell pendants, flexed burials in crude, stone-lined pits,
small, delicate flint drills, and (on some sites) European
trade material. Many of these traits are typical of the sites
at Belton. The Toyah Focus, another unit of the Central
Texas Aspect, was differentiated from the Austin Focus
by Kelley principally on the basis of an arrow point type,
Perdiz Pointed Stem. Kelley (1947b, p. 122) also considered
Cliffton Contracting Stem an element of the Toyah Focus,
although this does not seem likely since, except in rare instances, it occurs only in Austin Focus components.
The Toyah Focus was identified with the Jumano Indians,
and the widespread distribution of type Perdiz Pointed Stem
was attributed to extensive trade activities by that group.
Thus the large numbers of Perdiz points occurring in the
Frankston Focus (East Texas), the Rockport Focus (Texas
Gulf Coast), the Bravo Valley Aspect (West Texas), and
the Austin Focus (Central Texas) were all thought by
Kelley to have been traded in by the Jumanos (Toyah
Focus). However, Perdiz is such a consistent trait of these
foci that its presence in their components must be considered integral, whether manufactured on the spot or acquired
through trade. Except ~or this arrow point type, there is
nothing to suggest the presence of two different loci in the
Belton components of the Central Texas aspect, and since
ScalIorn, Perdiz, and Cli]]ton are ~onsistently associated
with one another in these sites it does not seem completely

feasible to separate them on a focal basis. In analyzing the
Belton sites, then, Scallo~n, Perdiz, and CIiffton, together
with the associated complex of other artifacts, are all considered traits of the Austin Focus.
Austin Focus (and Toyah Focus) material in the Colorado
River region south of Belton apparently occurs only in thin
deposits, frequently overlying earlier components of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect. The occasional presence of Eun.opean trade artifacts suggest historic occupation. Krieger
(1946, pp. 165-8) and Kelley (1947b, p. 127) assigned a
n~mimum date of circa 1500 A. D. for the appearance of the
Austin and Toyah loci in Central Texas, but data from the
Belton sites indicates a much earlier appearance.
Kelley’s and Krieger’s estimates were based primarily on
evidence from sites on the Colorado near Austin. While
it is possible that the Austin Focus components there are
somewhat later than the ones at Belton, an appreciable time
difference is extremely doubtful.
The apparent association of Austin Focus material at
Belton with Alto Focus trade pottery and arrow points,
Copena knives, and dart point types Ellis Stemmed and
Yarbrough Stemmed suggests a relatively early appearance
for the Austin Focus. This probability is strengthened by
recent River Basin Surveys investigations in the Whitney
Reservoir, not yet reported, where an Austin Focus component consisting of deposits approximately five feet in
thickness (a striking contrast to the thin Austin Focus
deposits on the Colorado River) was excavated in a rockshelter. This component, as well as the ones at Belton, contained no evidence of contact with white man, consequently
its terminal date was almost certainly prior to the 18th century ¯ and its beginning some centuries earlier.
Available evidence, then suggests that the Austin Focus
existed for several conturies in the Brazos-Leon area. Disappearance from the area by the beginning of the 18th century is indicated by the complete absence of associated trade

206

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

material of European manufacture.4 That Austin Focus
components in the Colorado River region are sometimes
associated with European trade material suggests a continuation there into the historic period. The writers believe that the Austin Focus appeared in the Brazos-Leon
area no later than 1200 A. D., and possibly long before.
The principal argument here--that the Austin Focus was
in existence in the Brazos-Leon area by 1200 A. D. or earlier
--is based largely on the assumption that the sherds of pottery type Holly Fine Engraved found at Belton were associated with Austin Focus components. As the tables show,
no identified sherds were found in situ, consequently there
is a possibility that the Holly sherds actually belong with
the Edwards Plateau Aspect components in the multiplecomponent sites. This does not seem likely, however, since
no pottery whatsoever was found at the Johnson Hole and
Horse Creek burnt rock middens---the only two sites investigated which contained no Au~2n Focus material. The other
burnt rock midden (Grimes-Houy) did contain pottery, ineluding type Holly Fine Engraved, but all sherds came ]ram
the top level where Austin Focus artifacts also occurred. In
addition, the Austin Focus components at the Johnson Hole
and Urbankte Sites, where Holly sherds were found, yieIded
~o indigenous artifacts except those of the Austin Focu~
complex. Thus the evidence leans toward the Austin Focus
as the source of the Holly sherds with a preponderance that
amounts to virtual certainty.

Other evidence supporting a proposed linkage between
the Austin Focus and the Alto Focus exists in a surface
collection from the Chupek Site (Watt), on the Brazos River
in McLennan County. A number of potsherds collected there
by Mr. Frank H. Watt of Waco are of Alto Focus types. Also
picked up from the surface of the Chupek Site were several
arrow points, all apparently Austin Focus types. Again,
4, Indirect evidence of hl~torlc occupation exlst~ in the sherds of one pottery
ves~el found at the Grime~Houy ~helter by Mr. Hill. ~ls v~l ~ ~imi~r ~ ~ ~
which is p~ent ~ ~e C~mvn~ Si~. C~ ~un~, In ~ciatton with Eu~p~n
~de materi~l.

Archeological Excavaeion~ af: the Bell;on Reservoir

209

however, the evidence for association is only circumstantial
since none of the Chupek artifacts were found in situ.
Looking toward the Caddoan area for further data, we
find that three Perdiz points and two possible Cli~Ston points
were found at the Davis Site, type site of the Alto Focus
(Newell and Krieger, pp. 164 and 191-2, Fig. 56, and Table
18). Although Krieger attributes their presence to a post-

Alto Focus occupation by the Frankston Focus, it is of
interest that one of the CHeVron points and two of the Perdiz
points came from excavation units in phase three of the
Alto Focus occupation (Newell and Krieger, Table 18). The
other possible Cli]~ton point came from the temple mound
phase, the second of the three Alto Focus phases. Thus the
Austin Focus artifacts found at the Davis Site were all in
levels which also contained Alto Focus material.
The broad distribution of arrow point type Perdiz Pointed
Stem involves problems which cannot be dealt with here.
The complete absence of European trade material and the
apparent contemporaneity of Perdiz Pointed Stern and Alto
Focus pottery, however, argue for an earlier appearance of
Perdiz in the Belton area--and probably in other areas-than has heretofore been postulated.
Bibliography

Campbell, T. N.
1948. "The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas."
BuZZetin o~ the Texas ArcheoIogica! and Pa~eonto~og.
icaZ Society, Vol. 19. Abilene.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. "The Fall Creek Sites." University o] Texas, PubIications, No. 3802. Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles.
1947a. "The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Po-

210

Texas Archeo~ogical and Paleontologicab Society

sition of the Clear Fork Focus." American Antiquity,
Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
1947b. "The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of
the Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci." Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 18, pp. 115-128. Abilene.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. "The Association of Archeological Material with
Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas."
West Texas Historical and ScientiSic Society, Publication, No. 10, Sut Ross State Teachers College, Bulletin,
Vol. 21, No. 3, Alpine.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944. "The Typological Concept." American Antiquity,
Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 271-288.
1946. "Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas." Publications, University of Texas, No. 4640. Austin.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger.
1949. "The George C. Davis Site~ Cherokee County, Texas." Society For American Archaeology, Memoirs, No. 5,
(American Antiquity, Vol. 14, No. 4, part 2.)
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938. "The Clear Fork Culture Complex." Bulletin o~
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 10, pp. 193-207. Abilene.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. "An Archeological Survey of Texas." Medallion
Papers, No. 17. Globe.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1950. "Culture Chronology in Texas." American An-

TABLE I.

Tabulation of artifacts, Urbankte Site (~I-39D~-15).
0-6" 6-12"

io~
!~
o~

~

Perdiz Po S.
Cllffton G.S.
Foyle Flake
Triangular
Unclassified
indet ermlnat e

0-6"

6--12"

Random

2
1
,,
1
1

Ensor S.
Darl S.
Ellis S.
Unclassified
Indeterminate

1

Copena
Concave base
Convex base
Straight base
Double pointed
Ind et ermlnat e

2
1
1
1

1
1

1

i

1

Side
Snub-nosed
Trimmed flake

2

,~
1
1
18
19
7
1

Large
Small

1

Gravers
Blades

12-18"

1

1

1
. .i~FlintQuartzite
.
u2oppers
Sandstone abrader,~
Hemat ire fragment~
Holly Fine Engr.
Incised
Engraved
Brushed
Pumctat e
Plain

21

lO
88

I

TABL~ 2. Tabulation of artifacts by 6-inch levels, Grimes-Houy Shelter (&l-39D&-17)
Square No.

Scallorn
Perdlz
Cliffton
Foyle
Triangular
Unclassified
Indeterminate
~nso~
Ds.TI
~llls
Yarbrough
Pedernales
Castroville
Triangular
Unolassifled
Indeterminate
Copena
Concave Base
Convex Base
Straight Base
Double-pointed
Four-edged, beveled
Indeterminate
Side
Snub-nosed
Trimmed Flake
Circular

1
1

1
12
i0

1

I
1

2
3
1

1

2

Large
Small
Gravers
Blades

2

Quartzite
Flint
Choppers
Hematite
IIolly Fine Engr
Incised
Engraved
Brushed
Punctate
Plain
Witl~ Basal joint
Splinter
Indeterminate
Deer Ulna Flakers
Bo~e ~eads. tubular
~one Tablets
Shell Pend~ts

li
|

6
5
1
1

1

0

o

Tcbulatlon of artlfects by 6~inch and 12-1rich levels, Johnson Hole Site

2o)

rEST

Soallora
P~rdiz
Cliffton
Alba
Triangular
Unclassified
Indeterminate
Ensor
Darl
E111s

1
2
7

Yarbrou~h

~artlndale
Bulverde
Castrov!lle
Pedernales
Gary
Wells or Morrill (?)
Unclassified
Indeterm£nate
Trlan~.ular
Oopena
Concave ~ase
Convex Base
Straight Base
Indeterminate

1
ll

2
i

17

2

Side
Snub-nosed
i Triced flake

3
1

19
2

Blades ~
@ravers
iHcmatite
Choppers
~e~a~es

Quartzite
Flint

De~ Ulna Fl~ers
i~Vith Joint
!S~£nter

~|Ol~y ~’ln~
Incised
Brushed
Plain
~n~rave~

2
10

1,

TABLE 5. Tabulation of artifacts 12-inch l~vels, FmrseCreek Site(Ai-39DA-21)
end Ament Shelter (~1-39D%-23}.
Horse Or~ Site
12-2~" 25-~6" ~6-~8" 68-60" 60-72"
Scallora
Perdiz
~liffton
Alba
~nclasslfied
Indeterminate
Ensor
Darl
~arbrou~h
Sastroville
Pedernales
Nolan
Unclassified
Indeterminate
~opena
Sonvex Base
Strai~ht Base

Ament Shelter
Unlmown Provenienc~
ii

1
1
1

2

1

1
i

1
1

16

Side
~rlmmed flake

3
~emat ire
~hoppers
~m

~uartzlte

~

~ano
~lint
¯wls, ~plln~ er
Dbsidien flakes
Bone tablets
~hell pendants
!Pottery pipes

2
1
1
1

Incised
Plain
Dravers

i

tiquity, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 151-157.
Watt, Frank H.
1941. "Preliminary Report on Potsherds from Chupek
Site." News-Letter, Central Texas Archaeological Society, No. 4, pp. 17-19. Waco.
Webb, Wm. S.
1939. "An Archaeological Survey of Wheeler Basin on
the Tennessee River in Northern Alabama." Bulletin,
Bureau oS American Ethnology, No. 122. Washington.
Webb, Win. S., David L. De Jarnette, and others.
1942. "An Archaeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in
the Adjacent Portions of the States of Alabama, Mdssissippi, and Tennessee." Bulletin, Bureau of American
Ethnology, No. 129. Washington.

REPORT ON ARCHAEOLOGICAL SALVAGE
IN.FALCON RESERVOIR, SEASON OF 1952
Joz F. CASO~r
Introduction

The Falcon Reservoir is located on the Rio Grande in
Starr and Zapata Counties, Texas. Falcon Dam is situated
in Starr County and is being built by a group of construction firms working under the supervision of the International Boundary and Water Commission.
The filling of the reservoir will initiate a program of
power production, flood control, and irrigation designed to
be of considerable aid to adjacent areas. There are certain
byproducts of the program which take on critical significance: the water covering the reservoir area will deny
archaeologists and historians access to the artifacts and
structures within the reservoir, will displace the population now living within the reservoir area, and will by that
displacement, create what may well constitute a major
change in the life way of those displaced.

Archaeological salvage has been undertaken in the area
for the past two years. Krieger and Hughes (1950), and
Aveleyra (1951) have produced papers dealing with several
facets of anthropology and history of the area, as well as
the salient data of their thorough archaeological reconnaissances. In these papers there is also a statement of the probferns encountered in the area and recommendations as to
their solution. Hartle (1951) has done salvage work in the
area and in a preliminary report thereon not only published
on the material susceptible to immediate analysis but also
contributed to the tentative description of the archaeological
column. In addition, Hartle pointed up several specific problems related to the archaeology.
Too much emphasis cannot be placed upon the desirability
of studying these papers prior to an examination of the
present report.

Report 0~ A~chaeologicat ~al~age I~ Falcon Reservoir

~19

As in previous years, the efforts and interest of Dr. Erik
K. Reed of the National Park Service were largely responsible for the continuance of the salvage operations. Dr.
Reed’s recommendations concerning the desirability of further work resulted in the National Park Service’s entering
into a contract with the University of Texas wherein the
National Park Service agreed to provide the funds necessary for the actual expenses of the operation, the major
outlay in funds, and the University of Texas agreed to
furnish the necessary technical supervision.
Mr. Alex D. Krieger, Archaeologist for the University
of Texas, undertook the supervision of the project in addition to his regular duties. The writer was placed in charge
of the salvage operations for the 1952 season.
There were other organizations and individuals who materially contributed to the operdtion. In the International
Boundary and Water Commission Messrs. L. M. Lawson,
R. B. Ward, Roger Collins, Robert Bickle, Isom H. Hale,
N. S. Smith, and Hugh Findlay contributed technical advice
or instruments and machinery. Messrs. Phillip C. Royer and
Richard Wheaton of the Falcon Dam Constructors were
especially helpful. Mr. Royer, the General Superintendent,
in effect adopted the salvage operation from its inception
and was most generous in his assistance which included
machinery, tools, repair, aerial photography, skilled technicians, and an unflagging interest in the daily progress of
the work.
Mr. and Mrs. Robert Sherron of Zapata displayed an in°
terest rare in laymen. Mr. Sherron, whose work with the
Department of Agriculture has given him an intimate known
edge of the area, was instrumental in the recovery of the
aboriginal burials. Mrs. Sherron, an instructor in the Zapata
School System, brought her entire class to the excavation
for a first hand period of instruction in the materials and
methods of prehistorical investigation, a new departure i~
primary education which speaks for itself.

220

Texa~ Archeological and Pa~eontotogicat 3ociet~

....

M_.r. Lester Marks of the United States Custom Service
extended every possible courtesy to the salvage group.
Mr. Glen Evans of the Texas Memorial Museum made a
trip to the area for the purpose of offering his assistance
with the geology of the terrace system and pointed up the

APAT~

78B5

78B8

FALGON DAM

FIGURE II
.Map of area ~howJng ~it¢~ located during 19G2

complication of the bedding through the action of both the
river and the lateral drainage. It is hoped that eircumstance~
will be such as to allow him to make a detailed study of the
terrace system in conjunction with any future archaeological
work in the area.
Last, but certainly not least, Mr. Tom L. Williamson,
student in training who was engaged in learning field methods, and Messrs. Juan and Roberto Castillo worked hard and
intelligently during the entire operation.
Preparatory Stud~l
The 1952 season of salvage operations in the Falcon Reservoir began on 2 January, 1952. Prior to going down to the
reservoir area, the writer made a study of the previous publications concerned with the area (Krieger and Hughes,
1950, and Hartle, 1951), of the cultural material obtained
during both seasons, and an examination of some of the
documentary sources available in the Library and Axchive~
of the University of Texas. The potential documentary
sources proved to be of such propo~ions that the examination was abandoned, and the widely known and variously
interpreted journal of Cabeza de Vaca and the comparatively obscure Historia de Nuevo Leon~ written by Capitan
Alonso de Leon, an anonymous author, and General Fernando Sanchez de Zamora were studied because the ethnography contained in both seems more or less germane
to the general area of the lower drainage of the Grande.
Reconnaissance

On 19 January Krieger and the writer went down to the
Falcon area. Some three days were spent in examining the
previously excavated sites and other promising sites located
by Hughes during the 1950 season. Since the reservoir extends some thirty-seven miles along the river, only a general impression of terrain and the potential characterist~s
of the sites was obtained so that the writer spent an additional two weeks in walking out the arroyo system and in
examining more of the sites located by Hughes.

Texa~ Archeologica~ and

Paleon~otogica~ Society

Natural Stratigraphy
The stratigraphy encountered in the face of the arroyo
banks merits considerable discussion because of the interrelation between the zones containing cultural material and
the physiography and historical geology of the area. The
face of an arroyo bank has one of two generalized forms:
that of a vertical cliff or that of an upper vertical face with
a lower slope. It would further seem that some factor other
than the nature of the material of the bedding sometimes
determines the presence or absence of the lower slope.
Material in both types of face was sometimes homogeneous,
sometimes not. These materials may be pure silt or a layer
of silt above a layer of yellow material (this term will be
employed throughout the remainder of this report for a
yellowish, partially granular, partially clayish earth which

FIGURE 12
Phil|ip C, P,oyer Site
Te~t. 4, Roberbo Test.
{~, M~a Test.

~, l~ar|~ T~st.

Eleva’,~ons are |n meters.

P~o~t On A~chaeo~ogica! Salvage In Falcon Re~oiz

223

seems to be in large part a disintegrated sandstone.~ When
wet, this material has a clay-like consistency and is more
cohesive than the silt. Permeability by water is high for
silt, low for the yellow material. Retention of moisture is
low for the silt and high for the yellow material). Other
faces of arroyo banks show an upper layer of silt, a middle
layer of yellow material, and a bottom layer of stone. In
general the stone layer will show a vertical face. A further
complication consists in the sporadic appearance of layers
or beddings of gravel which may be over and u~nderlain by
silt layers. The appearance of the gravel bedding in one
arroyo and its non-appearance in the next some 150 yards
distant is a matter to be explained by the geologists.
All types of arroyo face are sometimes covered with a silt
coating which conceals both the nature of the beddings and
the presence of burial cultural material. There are, however,
enough exposed faces of arroyo banks to permit a thorough
reconnaisance for the beddings to be encountered in the
area and for archaeological stratigraphy.
The Miniature Bedding~
The exposed faces generally reveal miniature beddings or
seams varying in thickness from a quarter of an inch to two
or three inches. These seams are characterized by greater
density and hardness than the silt above and below and in
general show fracture lines at right angles to the usually
horizontal line of the bedding. Where the silt crumbles, the
material in these seams shows clear-cut cleavage. There is
no great difference in color between silt and seam, but the
seam material feels as if it consisted in appreciably smaller
grain size resembling talc. Several seams may appear in
roughly parallel order in the silt bedding of the arroyo
face. In addition to appearing as lines of demarcation in
the vertical faces of the arroyo banks, these beddings produce a form of miniature step terracing because of differences in hardness and density. These seams would seem to
represent old land surfaces which have been overlaid with
the type of silting found in dry stream beds where dessica-

Texga Areheo~o~.c~ ~r.d P~er~to~og~c~

tion has produced a tile-like pattern of fracture of the sun-.
baked mud of the stream bottom.
Archaeological Stratigraphy

In those places where arroyo banks and hill slopes draining into adjacent arroyos indicate the presence of buried
cultural material, there seems to be two well defined zones
of cultural material. The upper zone extends from the surface to a depth of about one foot. The lower zone appears
in the faces of the arroyo banks about four feet below the
general surface of the surrounding terrain. In particular the
lower zone shows a fairly wide distribution and is generally
characterized by relatively heavy concentrations of carbon
and flint chips in the face of the bank.
In addition to the two above described zones a small number of sites show flint and carbon, jointly or separately, at
an approximate depth of ten feet below the present surface. Hartle (1951) excavated such a site (78-B9-4), one of
the six which Krieger and Hughes (1950) describe as being
deeply buried. Two more such sites were located during the
1952 season: 78-B9-17-2 and 78-B2-25.
Conclusions

The reconnaissance of the area led to two general conclusions: 1. The vast majority of the aboriginal surface
sites are immediately contiguous to an arroyo and are geno
erally close to a tinaja or the river. The uplands were examined as well as the arroyo system and do not show the
concentration of cultural material found on arroyo banks
nor such clear indications of occupancy in the form of
hearths, snail shell, mussel shell, and flint work, especially
piles of flint chips which are common in the arroyo sites.
2. W2aerever possible, those sites should be excavated which
would allow a balance of emphasis upon the working out
of the physiography and historical geology of the site and
the recovery of cultural material. This course of action
would bring about the fullest exploitation of the carbon
samples, which reconnaissance had shown to form a sig-

PLAT~ SO
Artifacts from

P~yer Site, Felipe Te~t

(78-~9-17-1).

on the thick ~lg~ of b~ken blade fragments.
small.kniv~:

1.

~lish~

pendant

of

hard

A-C. end scrapers chlpped

E-H. ~ian~lar projecti~e ~ints or

limestone,

len~h 2

13/16-inch--.

width

1
1/16.1nch~. thickn~s ~A-inch; upper ~ge has 13 small noshes, lower edge
no~ht~.
D. J-O, kniv~ (?): D, J. L. O have tips mi~i~g. N has ba~e
M may be a small axe blade.

24

The ~sition of thee sp~imcns can be obtain~ f~m

Table I by tracing the catalog numbers, as follows: A ~79), B (72), C
E (96).F (104),G (115), H (123), I (73), J
(4).
Size l~.

(12). K

(91), L

(30), M

~99),

127), N

(24), O

Report On Archaeo~ogica{ Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

227

nificant portion of cultural remains, through Carbon 14
dating. This decision influenced most of the excavation
during the 1952 season.
Excavation

oS Site 78-B9-8

After the surface and the faces of the arroyo banks had
been studied, subsurface testing was begun at 78-B9-8. This
site was close enough to the dam to allow the use of the
caterpillar, furnished by Mr. Rollins of the International
Boundary and Water Commission, and the caterpillar operator and the necessary maintenance, furnished by Mr. Royer
of the Falcon Dam Constructors. The availability of th~
equipment also influenced the choice of other nearby sites
for excavation.

78-B9-8 is situated in an arroyo bed and upon the adjacent
banks. The maximum relief is perhaps ten feet from the
bed of the arroyo to the top of the banks. On the upstream
end there is an outcropping of stone which continues for
some miles up and down stream more or less parallel to the
river. The site is approximately a half mile from the Grande
and is some eighty feet above the river. It is marked by a
heavy concentration of flint chips, several hearths apparently more or less.in situ, and numerous flint artifacts.
A test pit eight feet square was dug in the arroyo bank at
this site. Fired sandstone, flint chips and a small amount of
carbon were encountered in a zone approximately six inches
thick some two feet and three inches below the surface.
Innnediately below this cultural zone the soil changed from
silt to the yellow material previously described at a depth
of two feet and nine inches. Excavation in this yellow material was extremely difficult, a state of affairs later appreciated as a harbinger of any excavation attempted in this
material. The yellow material, except for small particles of
caliche, was completely sterile. Since no cultural material
susceptible to analysis had been found, and the excavation
indicated but one cultural zone, the site was abandoned.

Royer Site 78-B9-17
During the period of surface and stratigraphic reconnaissance, Mr. Richard Wheaton, an indefatigable week-end
collector, had shown us a site in Zapata County about 400
yards north of the Zapata-Starr Counties common boundary
line and about three hundred yards east of the Grande. This
site proved extremely rich in surface material and gave
promise of containing considerable stratigraphy. The terrain,
in general, consisted of a bowl-like depression draining into
an arroyo system. Extending back about three hundred
yards from the river a particularly deep tinaja marked a
general area (above the tinaja) of well defined cultural
zones in the face of the arroyo banks. From this tinaja,
both south and east for four or five hundred yards there
were large concentrations of old hearths eroded out of the
immediately subsurface zone, myriad flint chips, and many
artifacts.
:
The site was named for Phillip C. Royer and six test areas
were designated. All tests were conducted on a five foot
11

I228.35
22~.45

2~6o95
226.55
~5
225o~5

224o50

222.’~9

FIGURE ~3
Total ~lumn of natural stratigraphy in excursion of 7~-B9-17-1.
from point 16-I to 18-K as shown of figure 14.

Profile taken

Report On Archaeological ~a~vage In Falcon Reservoir

229

square system oriented on magnetic north except the Wheaton Test, North 30 degrees East, and Roberto Test, North
45 degrees East. Testing was undertaken for the purpose of
establishing stratigraphy and determining the advisability
of salvage operations with the caterpillar.
Felipe Test 78-B9-17.1 ~
The testing resulted in the recovery of a few artifacts
and a prodigious amount of carbon from old hearths. The
cultural material in no place protruded through the various
miniature beddings or seams herein before described but
seemed to show the heaviest concentrations immediately
below such beddings and immediately below the carbon of
the old hearths. In some five foot squares as many as 800
flint chips were recovered from a single three inch vertical
layer.
The significance of the stratigraphy will remain in doubt
until such time as a detailed analysis may be made of the
cultural material and the carbon collected can be dated.
The richest cultural zone occurred approximately four feet
beneath the surface. In view of the paucity of artifacts in
higher levels, it was decided to remove some three and onehalf feet of overburden for the exploitation of the rich zone.
The caterpillar was used to remove this overburden and
hand excavation was then resumed for the exploitation of
the heavy zone. A great amount of carbon was recovered
and a. sparse collection of artifacts. (Plate 30).
Wheaton Test 78-B9-17-2
In the meantime a flint blade or point had been found
in the vertical face of the Wheaton Test at a level nine feet
and ten inches below the surface at elevation 221.1. A second
blade or point was found at elevation 222.3, and a hearth
with "associated flint chi,ps between 222,3 and 221.4. This
material seemed to warrant an assumption of a deeply
buried cultural level.

Whereas in the Felipe Test the yellow material was encountered at an elevation of 222.70, some six feet below the

surface of the squares contiguous to the face of the arroyo
bank, and further excavation into this material revealed the
usual caliche particles but an otherwise sterile condition,
both of the flint points and the hearth in the face of the
arroyo bank at the Wheaton Test were well within the bedding of the yellow material. An apparent disconformity
between the silt and the yellow material occurred at 223.70
and was marked by a concave banding on the face of the
bank.
The Wheaton Test was then excavated by means of the

P~rtial grid of 78-B9-17-I.

FIGURE

Report On Archaeological 3alvage In Falcon Reservoir

281

caterpillar to an elevation approximately one foot above
the deeply buried cultural zone. Following the dozing operation, a test pit was sunk with the usual finding of caliche
in the yellow material. Further excavation produced flint
chips and fine particles of carbon, much like those described
by Hartle. Eventually a few artifacts were found. (Plate

31, B).
The digging was of a character to defy description. Eight
and ten pound picks were substituted for the light mattocks
with little better results, so that the sterile twelve inches
above the cultural zone came to constitute altogether too
much of a waste of time and effort. The caterpillar was used
to remove an additional nine inches or so of the yellow material. This second excavation was done by an operator who
had had prior experience with archaeological field methods
in the removal of overburden from Nebraskan sites. The
second dozing left the excavation entirely smooth and removed all loose material from within the excavation area.
Excavation by hand was continued with sparse results in
the shape of artifacts, the hardness of the yellow material
abating in no fashion whatsoever, but a hearth i~ sits was
encountered which yielded more than a quart of relatively
pure carbon. Burned flakes of flint, as well as the usual
fired sandstones, were also recovered.

Excavation was again halted and a dam built across the
front of the Wheaton Test whose grid system began back of
any portion of the arroyo face which had been removed by
the caterpillar. Ten thousand gallons of water were then
dumped into the test in an attempt to soften the yellow
material. Ten days later the "water cure" had reduced the
yellow material to the consistency of wedged potter’s clay
with a fairly dry surface or skin about one inch thick. This
partially dried surface was removed and screened so that
another inch or so of the material might be exposed and
subsequently dried. Further intermittent excavation was
continued until the end of the season.

232

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleon~ologica~ Socie~

It seems important that the Wheaton Test, unlike the
Felipe Test to the North and most of the exposed faces of
that finger of the arroyo upon which the Wheaton Test is
found, does not show more than the single concave band
marking the apparent disconformity between silt and yellow material. In no fashion does it show the six miniature
beddings revealed so clearly at the Felipe Test and upon
most faces of the arroyo banks within the drainage bowl.
This lack of miniature beddings may be a result of differential erosion which degraded the terrain to the north of the
Wheaton Test without materially affecting the overburden
at the test itself. Subsequent deposition would then account
for the miniature beddings to the north.
Isla Test 78-B9-17-3
The Isla Test is located in the bottom of the arroyo some
fifty yards northwest of the Wheaton Test. A small island
had resisted erosion to the extent that the original beddings
were preserved about six or seven feet above the floor of
the arroyo. Two five foot squares were cut down from the
top, elevation 226.00 feet, through the silt bedding and into
the yellow material. Here again the caliche appeared in the
yellow material and numerous flint chips and three artifacts
were found between the elevations of 224.00 to 222.00 feet,
this flint material perhaps constituting a continuum of the
culture zone found in the Wheaton Test. The Isla Test did
not contain miniature beddings in the silt above the yellow
material which could be identified. The character of the
material from the top to a considerable depth showed a disintegration of the bedding which consisted of vertical fissures. These fissures had the effect of producing a.crumbling, flake-like texture in the soil which extended into the
yellow material. Consequently the disconformity was not so
clearly marked as in the Wheaton Test but seems to have
been slightly higher in elevation, somewhere around 224.00
to 224.25. The apparent slope from north to south of the
yellow material between the Wheaton and Isla Tests exactly reverses the modern drainage of south to north and is

Report On Archaeologica~ ~atvage In Falcon Reservoir

supported by a few indications of the cultural zone in the
Wheaton Test showing a tendency to slope from north to
south, i. e., in the opposite direction from the modern drainage.
Roberto Test 78-B9-17-4
The Roberto Test, some seventy-five to one hundred feet
northeast of the Wheaton Test, showed fired sandstones in
the west face of the arroyo bank, elevation 223.97. Below
these stones, elevation 223.36, there is a thin layer of soft
sandstone some nine inches thick which gives every indication of being of fairly recent origin. Above and below this
layer of sandstone there is a bedding of the yellow material.
The beddings in the face from top to bottom consist in silt,
yellow material, recent sandstone (?), yellow material, and
a bedrock which seems to be an upper Crockett Formation.
These beddings are described because of the fact that the
Wheaton and Isla Tests do not show either the thin sandstone layer or the bedrocl~ It is supposed that past erosion
has removed the thin sandstone layer as well as the lower
bedrock. Consequently the yellow material in both the
vtrheaton and Isla Tests may bethe result of redeposition at
a time later than that for the yellow material at the Roberto
Testmif the yellow material is not the result of leeching.
Excavation at the Roberto Test produced flint chips, carbon, and a few artifacts, but no carbon in the immediate
vicinity of ’the burned sandstones previously mentioned. A
particularly rich carbon strike continued down some feet
from the elevation at which it was first encountered, probably the result of .a burned tree root. Enough carbon was
obtained in the very bottom of the excavation for dating
purposes, and this carbon, found some four feet from the
rich vein, was stored separately. The excavation in the
Roberto Test ended at 225.00 with the appearance of the
bedrock in square ,A", at 225.24 in Square "B", but a two
foot section was continued down to the burned hearthstones in the west face of the bank in a search for carbon.

236

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological Society

Mesa Test 78-B9-17-5

The Mesa and Nariz Tests immediately across the arroyo
from the Felipe Test were excavated for the purpose of
obtaining carbon samples of the same relative elevation as
that of the heaw3 zone in the Felipe Test. These tests were
small and shallow since erosion had progressed more rapidly on the south bank.
The surface of the ground of the Mesa Test seems to consist of an example of the step-terracing sometimes produced
by the miniature beddings. To the west of the test the
14

L>2 ~3

23

B

24

2~

221. o
FIGURE IS
Ez~cavutio,
by doz~ro

in

;~-B9-17~1.

Hmtehed eo|urnn~

exe.~vale~ b~

hand.

blank ~’ol~l~.

Repor~ On Archaeological Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

237

ground rises about a foot from a vertical face which shows
the miniature bedding denuded at the position of the test
itself. The higher ground to the west also seems to mark a
surface preserved by the harder material of the next higher
miniature bedding. As the ground slopes down toward the
east (upstream) from the position of the test an old hearth
appears denuded and surrounded by flint chips. The difference in elevation bet~veen the west side of the Mesa Test,
227.00, and the east side, 226.2, in a distance of twenty feet
might be explained by a relatively more efficient surface
erosion proportional to the distance from the next higher
level of the terracing. In any event, the material lying below
the elevation of 226.20 feet can possibly be taken as lying
below a miniature bedding whose lower limit is at that
level.
A carbon sample, flint .chips, and a couple of artifacts
were recovered from the Mesa Test.
Nar~z Test 78-B9-17-6
The Nariz Test consisted in reducing a small spur or nose
extending from south to north into the arroyo bed. Conditions of the material approximated those at the Isla Test.
The material was disintegrated and broken by vertical cracking and there were animal burrows in the northern portion
of the spur. Results of the excavation were nil until the
226.3-226.1 level was reached where three artifacts and a
carbon sample were obtained. A miniature bedding occurs
at about 226.3.
The EIenita Site 78-B9-19
The problem of the miniature beddings in relation to the
arroyo pattern was the motivation for two small test pits
being made in the Elenita Site. This site lies on the south
bank of the arroyo 200 yards south the Zapata-Starr Counties
boundary and some 100 yards east of the Grande. A finger
of the arroyo drains due north into the east to west main
drainage. Upon the east bank of this finger the Crockett

Texas Archeologica! and Paleontological Socie$y

238

0k

B

D

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

4
X

X

X

X

X

X
4
X

8
X

X
B

A

C

D

2~6.Z

:227,0

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

1
~2~,0
FIGURE

16

Grids for te~tn in Roycr Site. 2, Whcaton Test, 3, Isla Te.t
bie~a Test. 6, Nariz Te~t X : Excavated square~.

4,

Roberto Test

Report On Archaeological Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

239

sandstone is exposed in identical fashion as at the Roberto
Test of the Royer Site.
Two five foot squares were excavated in an island rising
from the floor of the arroyo finger from elevation 233.00 to
229.7, and a large collection of mussel shells and a carbon
sample were obtained. A clay seam overlay the hearth which
contained the mussel shells and the carbon so that a Carbon
14 date might be correlated with the seam which has a lower
limit of 230.2 feet elevation.
Smith Site 78-B9-20

The Smith Site was uncovered immediately south of the
dam axis by earth-moving equipment excavating a borrow
pit. Mr. N. S. Smith, Soil Analyst for the International
Boundary and Water Commission, noticed that a caterpillar
had exposed a large hearth and stopped the excavation long
enough to recover carbon and a flint, chopper. This hearth,
according to estimates by Smith and others, was struck
some ten feet below the original surface of the ground and
gave every indication of being in situ. A check of the excavation could not be made in time to effect further salvage.
CastiZlo Site 78-B2-22

Mr. Robert Sherron of the U. S. Agricultural Department
informed us of a burial discovered in one of the small arroyos immediately adjacent to the Arroyo Beleno. This site,
named after Juan Casti.llo, lies upon the lip of the arroyo
bank some two hundred yards east of the Grande. A sparse
surface collection of points and scrapers was collected in the
general vicinity of the burial. The burial itself was apparently about fourteen inches below the surface. Erosion had
exposed part of the skeletal material to the extent that Mr.
Gaspar Garcia, who discovered the burial, had recognized
the character of the bones. Mr. Garcia had either partially
or completely excavated the burial some six months prior
to our arrival. He had removed some six or eight points and
the left half of a mandible. One point had been found in
contact with the Iengual surface of the body of the mandible.

240

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

Subsequently, lVlr. Garcia had covered over the material
after removing the mandible and the points.
Examination of the site showed small fragments of bone
exposed on the surface. Excavation revealed considerable
skeletal material which included a complete skull, except
for the left half of the mandible previously mentioned, cervical vertebrae, ribs, fragments of the long bones of the
arms, and very small fragments of the femora. A second
complete mandible was also recovered. The location of most
of the material indicated that it had either been disturbed
by Mr. Garcia or was in part a secondary burial. There was
some slight indication that not all of the material had been
disturbed since the relation of the cervical vertebrae and
the ribs to the skull seemed more or less normal. The axis
of skull, cervical vertebrae, and ribs was from east to west,
but lack of sufficient post-cranial material precludes any
statement concerning flexure.
Recovered with the skeletal material was a large quantity
of tubular bone beads, ochre, flint points, a bone awl, and a
bone tube.
Excavation was continued until sterile silt was encountered around and under the skeletal material.
Garcia Site 78-B2-21
Mr. Garcia showed us a second burial to the west of the
highway some 500 yards from the Castiiio site. Here again
erosion had uncovered skeletal material and small fragments
lay exposed upon the surface. This material lay at the foot
of a vertical three-foot bank. Immediately subsurface excavation of the area of exposed fragments laid bare more bone
in a very fragmentarh, state, but relatively well-preserved
teeth indicated the presence of parts of at least two individuals, since molars of an adolescent or young adult with
negligible wear of the cusps, as well as molars showing
such wear of the cusp surfaces as to more or less obliterate
the cusps, were found.

PLATI~ 32
A, view of ert~led bnsin
ex~Vatlon.

in

which part~ of the

Royer Site are located,

~e materi~} is practically nil Mlt, r~tin~ on ~d~k.

which fo~ "miniature terracing" may ~ s~n in the middle dis~nee,
heart~

and

cnr~n

~mpl~

obtained

from

~veral

of

the~

before

Bt~flin~

plan~

The
will

help

r~nat~ct the ~s~glaeial ~logical h~. of the R~ G~nde and f~ tributari~
~. view of exeavntion~ in FeliDe T~L

~rth w~ remo~ by bulldozer down

main fla~ surface after the ~fltural leeela wer~ deiln~t~ by t~ pl~, as in Plate 4.

Report On Archaeological Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

243

Numerous tubular bone beads were mixed in among the
skeletal fragments, and an old wrought iron nail was found
on the surface. This was named the Gaspar Garcia Site.
Evans Site 78-B2-26
In another finger of the arroyo system containing the
Juan Castillo Site, rotted fragments of tusk of elephant or
mammoth were encountered in the bed of the arroyo where
they lay exposed. Superficial excavation below the exposed
fragments revealed more fragmentation. Samples of the
tusk were collected, but the site was otherwise left undisturbed, since Krieger had indicated at the beginning of the
season that paleontological finds would be l~ft for removal
by professional paleontologists.
After the close of all excavation Mr. Glen Evans visited
the area with Doctor T. N. Campbell and the writer for the
purpose of giving us any possible aid with the geology which
he could offer. He pronounced the sand upon which the
fragments lay and were embedded to be stream-washed.
Mr. Evans made a further superficial excavation that produced more fossils which he described as skull and tooth
fragments. In addition, just beneath the skeletal material and
some nine inches beneath the surface, he exposed a flint
flake showing unmistakable signs of human manufacture.
This site, the Glen Evans Site 78-B2-26, is situated approximately 100 yards east of the Grande at an elevation of forty
to fifty feet above the river. The bottom of the arroyo is
perhaps eight feet below the adjacent area. The topmost
bedding seems to be the usual silt found throughout the
reservoir area. This bedding is followed by the streamwashed sand, and the arnoya has cut down two or three feet
into this sand. Below the sand there is a tightly compacted
bed of gravel. Small nodules of this gravel are found in
meager quantities in the higher sand, there being some
small nodules mixed with the sand in which the skeletal
material was found.

244

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

TecoloteroSite 78-B2-25
A heavy seam of charcoal was found in the face of the
bank of the Arroyo Tecolotero. The charcoa~ was approximately ten feet below the surface of the adjacent terrain
and some four feet above the floor of the arroyo. A sample
of the carbon exposed in the arroyo face was first collected,
and then the bank was undercut so that an uncontaminated
~mple might be obtained from a sufficiently interior position in the bank as to preclude contamination from the atmosphere. Excavation seemed unwarranted without the aid
of the caterpillar which was some twenty-five miles downstream.
Gut~rrezSite 78-B2-24

Surface collections were made at several sites found during the 1952 season. The Gutierrez Site was found by Krieger
and the writer during the first few days of the season. This
site lies ,~pon the old Gutierrez porcion to the north of
Zapata, about five hundred yards from the river and at an
elevation of fifty or sixty feet above the stream at that point.
It is situated upon the top of the arroyo bank which consists
of silt v~ith an underbedding of gravel The cultural zone
seems to be confined to the surface which seems to have
been eroded down some two feet or more below the general
level of the rather flat terrace top at this point.
De Cuellar Site 78-B2-23
This site is located upon the top of the terrace between
the Castillo and Evans Sites. It is perhaps sixty feet above
the river at that point. The de Cuellar site seems to be colon°
ial Spanish in character. The site is marked by stone from
a completely destroyed building, a profusion of potsherds,
and other typical artifacts of colonial or later times. As is
usual in most colonial sites there is also a profusion of flint
work and crdde, utilitarian pottery fragments which might
lead the unsuspecting to conclude that the pottery was aboriginal. In this connection it must be reported that not a

Report On Archaeological Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

245

single potsherd has been found in the excavation of a precolonial site.
An arroyo finger which reaches to within fifty yards of
the ruined building revealed a tremendous mass of skeletal material which Mr. Glen Evans identified as that of
cattle and sheep or goat. Th~s material lies buried in a zone
from four to eighteen inches below the surface similar to
the skeleta] remains at the Castillo Site and at about the
same elevation above the river. These skeletal remains
would seem to be the remnants of an old abbatoir.

0

1

2

-

3

5

4

5

6

~

8

9

4

5

6

~

8

9

4

5

6

7

8

9~_

Silt
~-~~ Same elevation
FIGURE 17

Excavation in Wheaton Test (78-B-9 17-2).

246

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Rio Corto Site 78-B8-I4
This site lies on the north bank of a tributary of the
Arroyo Grande to the south of the village of Falcon. This
tributary drains south into the main arroyo and the site is
situated in the face of the bank as well as in a small remnant
or island rising from the arroyo floor. The general surface of
the terrace below whic.h the arroyo has cut is about sixty
feet above the river. Cultural material is found in profusion
upon the terrace surface, in a zone perhaps one foot beneath
the surface, and in a zone approximately four feet below the
surface. The deeper zone appears, from the amount of flint
chips exposed in the face of the bank, and exposed artifacts
which give every indication of having been weathered from
this zone, to be the richest zone of the site. All zones bearing
cultural material lie within a silt bedding.
Escondido Site 78-B9-18
This site lies upon a north branch and upstream from the
arroyo upon which 78-B9-8 is located. The elevation of the
site is about eighty feet above the Grande, and it is about
six hundred yards east of the river. The Escondido Site is
marked by rather precipitous banks and the floor of the
arroyo is fourteen to eighteen feet below the surface of the
surrounding terrain. The face of the arroyo bank shows that
the major portion of the bedding is silt. In this site the cultural zone is not well defined but seems to lie in an immedi-

l:l

B

i~

~

D

.

.gJ#~///lllllfXll~/I//l4 ~. ~
F~GURE 18

Excavation in 78-B9-17-80 4. 5, 6.

PLATE

33

Felipv Test. A. eroded bank ~fore excavation. Note b~dtng plan~ and columnat structure of silt. Snail shells spill~l at foot of bank are from several cultural
levels and are characteristic of all buried archaeological aites in the Falcon Reservoir area.
B~ view of ~ame bank after exc~tvation. Strings denote bedding ~eams
in silt.

Report On Archaeological Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

249

ately subsurface zone beneath the present general level of
the terrace. Material was found on the floor of the arroyo
as well as high on the sides of the arroyo face, but debris
eroded from what appears to have been the single cultural
layer can be traced upon the slope of the arroyo bank to an
immediately subsurface location.

For all sites excavated during the 1952 season, the geologic
column from the water’s edge of the Grande to a point immediately beyond the sites consists of a bedrock which
seems to be fairly continuous throughout the entire reservoir area and would seem to have a general upper limit of
between twenty and thirty feet above water level. In many
places the so-called modern terrace at the edge of the Grande
abuts against the face of this bedrock but does not completely cover it. Above the bedrock there is a bedding of
gravel or yellow material, and above this a bedding of silt.
Outcroppings of hard layers of stone are exposed in the
silt in successively higher levels, and these outcroppings
form lines roughly parallel to the river. In general there
is some evidence to support the contention that the twenty
to thirty foot level of the bedrock is continuous for two or
three hundred feet back from the river, and that the out~
croppings which are distinctly higher, may represent previous stages of erosion.

This idealized column seems to have been complicated by
erosion and deposition both from the lateral drainage systems and from the river itself, so that each individual site
constitutes a separate problem.
The relative abundance of carbon recovered should furnish some illumination of the problems of physiography and
climate related to the upper beds, as well as provide dating
for the cultural remains.

Since the carbon from the old hearths constitutes the bulk
of the material found, some discussion of the hearths is in
order. In general, the hearths consisted of a few burned sand-

250

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

stone chunks and carbon. In rare instances there was a considerable quantity of burned earth or of earth so heavily
impregnated with carbon as to have a dark, distinct color1
quite different from the tan silt or yellow material. There
was no symmetric pattern of disposition of the hearth stones.
Generally there would be three or four stones about six to
eight inches in diameter and several smaller fragments.
Carbon was also found in many instances where only a few
small fragments of burned sandstone were in association.
Snail shell and flint were generally more plentiful immediately contiguous to the carbon finds, and in many instances
flint chips and broken artifacts were found below the
hearths but showed no indication of damage from heat.
In some squares considerable carbon was recovered in
small, discrete particles, much in the fashion described by
Hartle (1951). Subsequent excavation in adjacent squares
exposed a hearth or mass of carbon upon the same level so
that one might tentatively conclude that the discrete particles had in some fashion or other been scattered, washed
or blown away from the adjacent fire.
The presence of carbon could sometimes be suspected
several inches higher in the excavation than the actual material. In such cases the silt would appear slightly moist
above the area of the buried carbon and the carbon, upon
excavation, would contain moisture. Practically no rainfall
was had during the entire excavation, but a heavy rain of
eight inches had fallen the prior September. In general the
moisture content of the silt and the yellow material seemed
negligible although some evaporation was perceptible because of color change after exposure and the increase in
dust, a condition readily noted because of continuous wind.
This observation is made because it makes possible some
contamination of the carbon from rainfall and seepage.
The lists of materials excavated are included for the purpose of showing not only the general types of material found
but also the quantities. The descriptive terminology is extremely tentative insofar as the flint work is concerned so

Repo~ On, Archaeological Salvage I~ Falco~ Reservoir-

251

that any permanent classification differentiating blades and
projectile points will have to await the detailed analysis of
all the material. Hartle’s finding of relative unii’ormity of
artifacts from top to bottom of the archaeological column
must stand because artifacts excavated during the 1952 season show a similar uniformity.
Recommendatior~
Insofar as the archaeology is concerned further work in
the area is needed, particularly in working out the correlation between cultural horizons and physiography and climate. In addition there is a considerable body of information
to be had in the area concerning the remains of elephant or
mammoth. Reports of findings of elephant bones are almost
as numerous as the arroyos in the drainage system in the
area and considerable skeletal material is now in the possession of lay collectors, most of whom can relocate the areas
from which the bones were collected. A majority of the
finds seem to have come from the gravel beddings, but a few
have been recovered from the silt. The probable occurrence
of associated cultural material with these elephant remains
merits investigation.
In any event, the services of a competent geologist who
could devote enough time to the project to help work out a
joint plan of attack upon the problem and accomplish the
necessary surveys of the terrace system seem vitally necessary for a well-rounded future program.

The excavation of prehistoric sites in this reservoir must
also be planned around the essential point that vast quantities of terrace silt must be removed in order to clear
archaeological sites which are, at best, very thin zones with
a few widely scattered artifacts and hearths. Such excavatioR will be rewarding, however, for this season’s work
showed that cultural material is buried in terraces which
had reached (before their subsequent erosion) heights of
sixty, seventy, and perhaps even eighty to ninety feet above
the present Rio Grande water level. Consequently, despite

252

Texas Archeological and Paleontologlcal Society__ .............

the simplicity of the artifacts, a very long history of human
occupation and climatic changes over several thousand years
can be expected.

TABLE I
Provenience o] Specimens
CO: Co-ordinates.
F : Fragment.
W : Worked.
Point: Projectile Point (?).
Felipe Test (78-B9-17-1)
Catalog
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

Specimen

Carbon sample _._
.
Blade, F
Blade, F
Blade, F
.
Blade, F
Ochre
Blade, F
Carbon sample ....
Carbon sample _._
Blade, F ............
Flint, W ............
Blade, F .........
Carbon sample ._
Carbon sample __
Snail Shells, stop.
Carbon sample ....
Flint, W ...........
Carbon sample _
Carbon sample _.
Carbon sample _
Carbon sample __
Carbon sample _
Flint, W

CO

2D
15E
15E
15E
15I
15I
14A
14B
14D
16F
16F
16F
16I
16I
16I
16I
16I
16I
16I
17B
17DE
17F
17F

Elevation of Level
in which found
Upper
Lower
227.3
227.0
227.0
226.65
227.0
226.65
226.2
225.75
225.75
225.5
225.75
225.5
226.6
225.0
226.0
225.65
227.0
226.5
225.75
225.5
225.5
225.3
225.3
225.0
227.1
226.75
226.0
225.75
226.0
225.75
225.75
225.5
225.75
225.5
225.25
225.0
225.5
225.25
225.5
225.0
227.5
227.0
226.45
225.8
226.45
225.8

Report On Archaeological Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

Number
Number

Specimen

CO

253

Elevation of Level
in which found

24

Blade .............. 17F

Upper
225.8

Lower
225.3

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58

Carbon sample _
Shell, W
Blade ...............
Flint, W
Flint, W ..........
Blade, F ..........
Carbon sample _
Blade, F
Carbon sample .__
Carbon sample _
Carbon sample .._
Carbon sample __
Chopper
Carbon sample _._
Carbon sample __
Bone, F
Point
Flint, W ..............
Flint, W
Chopper ............
Carbon sample ....
Carbon sample .._
Carbon sample _.
Carbon sample _..
Mussel shell ....
Ocher
Carbon sample ._
Carbon sample _._
Blade F
Carbon sample ....
Pebble, polished _
Carbon sample ....
Chopper .............
Shell bead ......

228.25
229.0
227.5
226.9
226.9
228.25
227.35
227.35
227.35
227.1
225.85
226.25
225.85
225.75
225.5
225.5
225.5
225.5
225.5
224.75
224.25
224.0
223.75
223.5
228.6
228.35
227.35
227.35
227.35
225.85
225.85
225.35
224.6
227.35

227.75
228.75
227.25
226.0
226.0
227.85
227.1
226.6
226.6
226.75
225.75
225.85
225.75
225.5
225.25
225.25
225.25
225.25
225.25
224.5
224.0
223.75
223.5
223.25
228.35
228.1
227.1
227.1
227.1
225.35
225.35
225.2
224.35
226.85

17G
17It
17It
17G
17G
17I
17I-N½
17I-SV2
17I-SV~
17I-N½
17I-N1/2
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-NV2
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
17I-N½
16I
16I
16I
16I
16I
165
165
165
165
17J

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

254

Catalog
Number

Specimen

CO

Elevation of Level
in which found
Upper
Lower

59

Carbon sample .... 17J

227.35

60

Burned earth ...... 17J

227.35

226.85

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93

Carbon sample ._._
Carbon sample ._
Carbon aample __
Flint, W ..........
Carbon sample ....
Carbon sample __
Flint, W
Flint, W
Pebble, polished _
Point, F
Carbon sample ._
End scraper .....
Pendant, stone __
Flint, W ...........
Carbon sample __
Carbon sample ....
Carbon sample ....
Carbon sample _._
End scraper .........
Carbon sample ....
Carbon sample ....
Flint, W ...............
Carbon sample __
Carbon sample __
Carbon sample __
Carbon sample ....
Flint, W ................
Blade, F ...............
Flint, W ............
Blade .................
Blade ................
Flint, W ................
Carbon sample ._

226.35
225.6
225.35
225.1
224.35
226.35
225.6
224.35
225.6
225.6
226.25
226.25
225.85
225.85
225.85
226.75
226.1
225.5
225.5
226.75
226.7
226.75
226.7
226.15
226.15
225.95
225.95
225.95
225.95
225.95
225.95
225.95
225.95

225.85
225.35
225.1
224.85
224.1
226.1
22~25
224.1
225.4
225.4
225.85
225.8~
225.5
225.5
225.5
226.1
225.5
225.0
225.0
225:4
226.2
225.4
225.4

17J
17J
17J
17J
17J
17K
17K
17K
18E
18E
18F
18F
18F
18F
18F
18G
18G
18G
18G
18H-W½
18H-E V2
18H-W½
18H-EV2
18I
18I
18I
18I
18I
18I
185
185
185
t85

226.85

225.95
225.45
225.45
225.45
225.45
225.45
225.45
225.45
225.45

Report

Catalog
Number

On

Archeologica! Salvage In Falcon Reservoir

255

Specimen

CO

94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104

Blade, F
Bone, F
Point
Blade, F
Blade, F
End scraper ....
Point, F
Shark Tooth ~
Point
Pebble, polished _
Point

18J
18J
19G
19G
19H
19H
19H
20G
20G
21G
21G

Upper
225.95
225.95
226.3
226.3
226.2
226.2
226.3
225.75
225.75
225.2
225.2

Lower
225.45
225.45
225.7
225.7
225.3
225.3
225.2
225.1
225.1
224.75
224.75

105

Bone, F

21G

224.75

224.4

106

Carbon sample ._ 22K

227.15

107

Carbon sample __ 22K

227.15

226.65

108

Flint, W ............ 22K

227.15

226.65

109

Carbon sample __ 22K

226.15

225.9

II0

Mussel shell ___ 22K

225.6

225.2

Ill

Coal (?)

.22K

224.4

224.1

ll2

Stone, painted (?) 22K

224.4

~.24.1

ll3

Carbon sample __ 22K

224.4

224.1

114

Flint, W

24G

225.5

225.2

115

Point, F

24G

225.5

225.2

116

Carbon sample __ 25JK

222.5

221.8

117

Carbon sample ._ 25JK

221.8

221.3

118

Point, F ........... 26/27J
Carbon sample _ 26/27J

222.3

221.6

221.5

221.1

221.5

221.1

121

Flint, W
26/27J
Carbon sample _ 25JK

221.3

221.1

122

Scraper

22L

225.0

224.7

123

Point, F

26/27J

221.5

221.1

124

Flint, W

28J

221.75

221.5

125

Carbon sample ._. 28J

221.3

221.0

119
120

Elevation of Level
in which found

256

Texas Archeologica! and Paleontological Society

Wheaten Test (78-B9-I7-2)
Catalog
Number

Specimen

CO

1
2
3
4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Carbon sample ....
Carbon sample _..
Carbon sample ....
Point ...............
Ocher
Point
Point .................
Carbon sample _
Blade, F ...............
Point ...................
Flint, W ...........
Blade, F ................
Point, F ................
Flint, W
Point ...................
Carbon sample ....
Ocher
Point ................
Carbon sample ....
Spokeshave ......
Blade .................

OA
OA
1A
1A
2A
2A
2A
2A
2B
2B
2B
2C
3A
3A
3C
4B
4B
4C
7A
7C
7C

Elevation of Level
in which found
Upper
Lower
222.75
222.0
222.0
221.75
222.75
222.5
222.25
222.25
222.0
222.5
222.75
222.5
222.25
222.5
222.25
222.25
222.0
222.25
222.0
222.25
222.0
222.25
222.0
222.5
222.25
222.5
222.25
222.25
222.0
222.0
222.25
222.25
222.0
222.25
222.0
222.5
222.25
222.25
222.0
222.25
222.0

23

Blade, F ..............

7C

222.25

24

222.0

Scraper ..................

7C

222.25

222.0

25

Blade, F .............

7C

222.25

222.0

26

Flint, W ............

7C

222.25

222.0

27

Blade, F ...............

8A

222.25

222.0

29

Scraper ...................

8A

222.0

221.75

30

Point, F ..........

8A

222.0

221.75

31

Blade

~

222.75

222.5

32

Point, F ...........

~
~/
°

222.75

222.5

222.75

222.5

33

Blade, F ................

34

Flint, W ................

223.7

Report On Archaeological Salvage In F~Icon Reservoir

Catalog
Number
35
36
37
38

Specimen

CO

Blade, F .............
Blade ..............
Carbon sample __
Carbon sample __

*
*
2B
2B

25?

Elevation of Level
in which found
Upper
Louver
222.3
221.1
223.75
223.75

* Removed from vertical face of arroyo bank prior to excavation.
# Removed from material excavated by dozer.
Roberto Test (78-B9-17-4)
1
2
3
4
5

Carbon
Carbon
Carbon
Point
Scraper

sample _
sample _
sample _
...........

A
A
A
A
A

228.96
228.21
227.71
225.99
225.48

228.71
227.95
227.15
225.78
225.27

Mesa Test (78-B9-17-5)
1
2
3

Carbon sample __
Point ...............
Flint, W

1B
0B
1D

227.0
226.80
226.6

226.0
225.8
225.6

Nariz Test (78-B9-17-6)
1
2
3
4

Blade, F
Carbon sample ._
Blade, F
Blade, F .............

3A
3A
3A
3A

226.3
226.3
226.3
226.3

226.1
226.1
226.1
226.1

Elenita Site (78-B9-19)

1
2
3

Blade, F = ............
Carbon sample ....
Mussel shells .....

230.5
230.21
229.93

229.5
229.75

Smith Site (78-B9-20)

1
2
3

Carbon sample
Flint, W ..................
Sandstone, smoothed ....

10 feet below surface
10 feet below surface
10 feet below surface

~58

Te~a~ Archeologlcal a~d Pgleo~tological Society

Garcia Site (78-B2-21)
1

Bone beads .................

Zero to one foot

2

Point ........................

Zero to one foot~

3

Flint, W ..................

Zero to one foot

4

Pebble, polished

Zero to one foot

5

Flint, W .....................

Zero to one foot

6

Pebble, polished _~

Zero to one foot

7

Ocher

Zero to one foot

8

Flint, W

Zero to one foot

9

Nail

Zero to one foot
Castillo Site (78-B2-22)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Point
Point
Point
Point
Blade
Blade
Blade
Blade
Blade, F
Blade, F
Blade, F
Ocher, scratched
Ocher, scratched
Ocher
Bone beads
Bone awl
Bone tube
Ocher
Scraper

Zero to eighteen inches
All remaining material
in same level

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis.
(1951) Reconocimiento ArqueolSgico en la Zona de la
Presa Internacional FalcSn, Tamaulipas y Texas. Revista

Report 0~. A~’chaeolo~ical Salvage I~ Falco~ Reservoir

259

Mexicana de Estudios AntropolSgicos, Tomo XII, pp. 3159. l~xico.
Bandelier, Fanny.
(1922) The Journey of Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca
and his Companions from Flordia to the Pacific, 15281536. New York, 231 pp.
3.

Garcla, G~naro.
(1909) Documentos In~ditos o Muy Raros para la Historia de M~xico, Tomo XXV. M~xico, 400 pp.
De Leon, Capitan Alonzo, un Autor AnSni_mo y el General Fernando Sanchez de Zamora, Historia de Nuevo
Leon.

4~

Hartle, Donald D.
(1951) Archaeological Excavations at the Falcon Res’
ervoir, Start County, Texas. River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution, Washington. 26 pp.

5.

Krieger, Alex D. and Hughes, Jack T.
(1950) Archaeological Salvage in the Falcon Reservoir
Area, Progress Report No. 1. Austin, 38 pp. (Mimeographed).

THE OLMEC PHASE IN EASTERN MEXICO
ROBERT E.

GREENCo

Introduction
It is proposed here to survey cultural manifestations on
the Gulf coast of southern Mexico. These range from the
Rio Papaloapan drainage in southern Veracruz to that of
the Rio Tonala in Tabasco. The area extends about 30 miles
inland from the coast up the Rio Coatzacoalcos system. The
whole area has a tropical rain-forest climate.
We will employ the cultural terminology suggested by
Dr. A. V. Kidder in a seminar on Meso-America given at
the University of California in the spring of 1951. He recognizes six main periods or stages: Early Man, Emergent Agricultural-Ceramic, Pre-Classic, Classic, Post-Classic, and Proto-Historic. It should be realized that there are several other
"systems" of cultural designation for Meso-America, which
cannot be discussed at this time. The stages postulated by
Dr. Kidder may be subdivided on the basis of site-to-site
differences, as well as differences within stratified sites.
Such subdivisions are called phases as defined by Kidder,
Jem,Angs, and Shook (1946, p. 9) : "A cultural complex possessing traits sufficiently characteristic to distinguish it, for
purposes of preliminary archaeological classification, from
earlier and later manifestations of the cultural development
of which it formed a part, and from other, contemporaneous
complexes."
The Pre-Classic Stage
We will be concerned primarily with the Pre-Classic stage
in this study, which appears to be the earliest at a number
of Meso-American sites on the east coast. This is characterized by well-developed complexes of pottery, maize agriculture, and hand-made clay figurines which bespeak a pattern of living similar in most essentials to that of the Indians
living in the same rural districts today. These characteristics
of the Pre-Classic are the few general ones on which archaeologists have attained a measure of agreement. Certainly,

The O~ec Pha~e I~ Eo~ter~ Me~ico

261

another trait of this stage was that of constructing mounds
of earth and rubble for ceremonial purposes. Beyond this,
however, the special details which set off Pre-Classic mounds
and (or) pyramids from those of the following Classic period
are not clear. Until quite recently the criteria of bar-and-dot
dates, hieroglyphic inscriptions, and fine stone carving have
been considered Classic traits. Evidence is now accumulating
that the concept of the Classic stage can no longer be so
simply stated, and that regional variations, rather than time,
may be responsible for the presence or absence of such
traits. Wauchope (1950, pp. 212-214, 218) has stressed the
differences between Pre-Classic sites which appear to be on
the same general time level.
Since the main purpose of this paper is to present some
of the data which bear on the definitions of Pre-Classic and
Classic, we will withhold further comment for the present.
The OImec Problem
The word "Olmec" signifies "inhabitants of the rubber
region," as it derives from a Nahua (?) word olman, "where
there is rubber", or olli mani, "where rubber is gathered"
(Jimenez Moreno, 1942 b, p. 119).
Sahagun (translation, 1830, Vol. 3, Book X, Chap. XXXIX,
pp. 136-137), writing shortly after the Conquest, gives a good
account of a people called the Olmec who lived toward the
east (of ]~¢Iexico City) on the Gulf Coast. He n-ientions that
they had elaborate clothes, gold, rubber (including rubber
sandals) and jade as well as an abundant supply of Quetzal
feathers. They were said to have spoken a barbaric language, although some also spoke Nahua.
Beginning with such information from the Chronicles,
much controversy has arisen over the identity of these rubber people, what language they spoke and what their culture was like. Quite distinct from the question of the identity of the pro~o,h~s~oric Olmec through the literature,
knowledge of this area can be said to have been approached
from the opposite angle, through strange and supposedly

Texas Archeologic~ ~nd Pa~eo~o~ogic~ Societ~

very old archaeological finds. From the late nineteenth centuxy to the present, discussion has revolved around the antiquity and origin of bar and dot glyphs of apparently 7th
and 8th Baktun dates, as well as of beautiful jade carving
of humanized jaguar faces, crying babies, combinations of
both and other features to be discussed below. Though not
the first such find, the controversy was touched off in 1907
when Holmes published an illustration of a curious little
jade figure, the now famous Tuxtla Statuette from near
San Andres Tuxtla in southern Veracruz. Most remarkably
this object has inscribed on its surface a series of bars and
dots which may possibly represent an 8th cycle date of the
Maya Initial Series. Such a date is controversial because
(1) this is supposedly a non-Maya region; (2) the bars and
dots do not have accompanying glyphs (as do most Maya
date inscriptions) ; and (3) the date appears to be much too
early for the Maya long count. The gist of these objections
is that Maya-type Initial Series dates have been confined to
the Classic Maya area and have not preceded the 9th cycle.
To understand how the Tuxtla Statuette with its 8th Baktun
date ties in with the Olmec problem we must first discuss
another find.
At an archaeological site called Tres Zapotes, about 15
miles from the locale in which the Tuxtla Statuette was
found, are groups of earth mounds. In the front of the
second largest mound at the site (C, 1), a fragment of a
stela (Stela C) was unearthed standing on end next to a
fiat circular stone which may have been an altar. This stela
fragment measuring approximately 88 cm. wide and 50 cm.
high was apparently broken from a larger piece. One side
of the stela contains a bar and dot inscription which, if it
represents the Initial Series, bears a date of the 7th Baktun,
the earliest date yet found. On the other side of the stela is
a very weather-worn carving of a conventionalized feline
face in low relief. The supposed history of the stone involves:
first, use of the stone as a larger monument which fell, date
side down; considerable time then elapsed in order for the
feline carving side to weather (the material is very hard);

The Olmee Phase Ir~ Eas~er~ Me:~ico

263

secondly, the large original stela was found and broken, this
fragment being set on end near the stone altar in front o£
mound C, 1.
Due to the facts that the dates on Stela C and on the
Tuxtla Statuette are executed in a very similar manner,
that they were found in the same general region and that
they are both supposed to be quite early, there is good reason
to believe that there-may be a close cultural connection between the two. As we shall see below, the "tiger" mask on
Stela C is of an artistic tradition which apparently centers
in that same area. This tradition hhs a number of aspects
which connect it quite certainly with the Pre-Classic horizon
(as defined above), some of which seem to have persisted in
and influenced the later, Classic art styles. On the other
hand there are also found here several categories of rather
unique objects whose cultural connections apparently do
not extend beyond the southern Veracruz-Tabasco Gulf

The initial step toward identifying this mysterious artistic
tradition was made by Saville (1929) in his study of "Votive.
Axes." He found at least two types of representations, the.
"tiger face" and the "baby face" which sometimes appeared
separately while at other times features of the two were,
merged. He also found that they were encountered in two
different media, on votive axes and in relief sculptures.~
However, it was not until 1932 that Vaiilant, in publishing"
an illustration of a beautiful jade "jaguar-baby" figurine¯
from Puebla, suggested the name "Ohnec" for this artistictradition. He pointed out that people in an area often build.
up semi-mythical legends about those who have gone before..
Examples of the art of the Toltecs, the early Zapotecs and
even the early Totonacs who appear in Nahua legends hav~
been partially extricated from mere legendary existence via
the medium of archaeology. One such half-legendary people,
the Olmec, is described as having lived as far north a~,
Tlaxcala, but were later dispersed to southern Veracruz,
Chiapas, southern Puebla and eastern Oaxaca. They wer~

264

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

well known for their jade work and their utilization of
rubber. Therefore, because the area from which the "tiger
face" and "baby face" representations come was roughly
the same as that which the legendary Olmec were supposed
to have occupied. Vaillant suggested that the unique art was
the product of the Olmec, although he admitted no other
material culture could be assigned to them.
While no one knew very much about this artistic complex
and almost nothing culturally about the people who practiced it, at least now it had a name as well as a sort of working hypothesis with which to probe deeper into the problem.
Almost all of the objects which could be called Olmec had
become known under unscientific circumstances. There still
~emainec~ the problem of finding and excavating an "Olmec"
site.
As a matter of fact, two sites of this nature were already
recorded in the literature. As early as 1869 Melgar had mentioned the colossal head of Tres Zapotes and in 1871 published a paper on it. From time to time others mentioned
either pottery material from the area or the colossal head
(e. g., Seler-Sachs, 1922). Wyerstall in 1932 published a
paper which gave more than an inkling of the nature of
the archaeology of southern Veracruz. Finally, during the
dry seasons of 1938-1939 Stifling commenced excavation at
Tres Zapotes (Stirling, 1939).
The other Olmec site which had been mentioned in the
literature was that of La Venta, on the Tonala River in
Tabasco not far from the Veracruz border. The first notice
of this site was recorded by Charnay in 1887. Blom and
La Farge visited the site in 1925 and published several photographs of La Venta’s stone monuments (as well as of two
statues from there, which had been removed to the city of
Villahermosa). They also drew a rude sketch map of the
site. Joyce (1931) wrote a brief notice accompanied by several photographs of the La Venta site. Excavation was initiated there in 1940 by Stifling (1940) for a period of 10 days,
while more extensive work was done in 1942.

The Olmec Phgse I~ Eo~te~n Mexico

265

Tres Zapotes
Before launching into a resume of the material manifestations of this and other sites it might be well to state the
major categories of evidence with which we are to deal:
architecture, stone monuments, pottery and figurines, and
jade work.
Architectural remains at Tres Zapotes consist of mounds
of earth, arranged in irregular groups. The only pattern apparent is that of building "a relatively high steep mound,
often ch-cular but sometimes four-sided in plan, adjacent to
a long narrow mound. Smaller mounds, usually rather low
domes, were built as flankers, often in pairs, to complete the
group." This pattern is significant because it recurs in other
sites in the region (Stirling, 1943 a, pp. 10-11).
The two highest mounds are about 40 feet high and some
150 feet square at the baselines. Perhaps the largest mound
is a long one (425 feet), 57 feet wide and 25 feet high. There
are also very small mounds 6 to 8 feet high and 40 to 50 feet
across. None were stone faced and, in fact, the only stone
used was in a small stone platform and on two short sandstone treaded stairways. (Stifling, 1943a, p. 11; pl. 2b, 3;
Drucker, 1943a, pl. 2-4). Stifling (1943a, p. 11) in generalizLug about the stone monuments of Tres Zapotes states that
they occur "singly and are widely scattered over the large
site (2 miles long in the floor and on the slopes of an arroyo). Most of them are carved from basalt, a rock which is
abundant in the region, especially around the base of nearby
Tuxtla Mountain. All of the monuments have suffered intentional mutilation in greater or less degree, suggesting the
work of an invading people. Likewise, it is probable that
many of them had been moved from their original locations."
We have already discussed Stela C. Another and certainly
the most spectacular stone monument is the colossal head,
measuring about 6 feet high and eighteen feet in circumference. It is made of gray basalt which matches that of
some large blocks 10 miles distant. The facial features are

266

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sensitively carved to represent an individual with large
eyes, low wide nose and thick lips, with a headdress, perhaps
somewhat conventionalized or difficult to represent in stone,
that looks like a football helmet. Ears are represented by an
open "S" design, and the back of the head is flat with parallel
vertical incisions probably representing hair (Stirling, 1943a,
p. 16, pl. 4; 1939, p. 185). Other monuments at Tres Zapotes
of especial significance are Stela A which has a center portion missing, yet measures 17 feet 7 inches long. On it is
carved a mask quite similar to that on Stela C (Stifling,
1943a, pp. 11-14, fig. 3, and pl. 12). Steta D (ibid., pp. 14-16,
fig. 4 and pl. 14a, b) represents a conventionalized openmouthed animal, probably a jaguar, on which the back of the
mouth is flat with low relief figures. Another figure is
carved into the roof of the mouth. The stela is 58 inches high.
Another most significant type of stone monument are two
large stone boxes, Monuments B and C. They both have a
maximum length of about 5 feet and a maximum width of
around 3 feet, with sides 5 to 8 inches thick and bottoms 12
to 16 inches thick. Monument C has elaborate curvilinear
designs and human figures carved on the 4 outer sides. (ibid.,
pp. 17-21, pl. 5, 7a, 17a, b, 18a, b).
Monument E (ibid., pp. 22-23, fig. 5) consists of a rectangular slab 5x6 feet and 10 inches high carved in the living
rock in the Arroyo de Hueyapan. On this slab are carved a
dot and two bar numerals. This monument is now under 4
feet of water in the dry season. Its significance lies in its
connection with the earliest stratified deposits at the site
(Drucker, 1943, p. 34).
Monument M is quite interesting because it resembles
more closely than most others at this site particularly characteristic features of Olmec artmdrooping mouth, flat nose,
rectangular shaped ears, high head, flat in the back with a
turban-like headdress (ibid., p. 24, pl. 11 b-d).
Although two reports have appeared on the pottery of
Tres Zapotes (Drucker, 1943; Weiant, 1943) only Drucker’s

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

267

was based on careful stratigraphic excavation, which makes
it, for our purposes, the more important of the two. He found
three ceramic levels, Lower, Middle and Upper Tres Zapotes.
These levels agree with similar stratigraphic differences in
figurine types.
Lower Tres Zapotes
The lower level is characterized almost exclusively by
coarse or medium coarse paste Brown and Black monochrome wares, "which emphasize vessel form as a field for
esthetic elaboration.., the net effect is that of a pure and
self-contained pottery complex" (Drucker, 1943 a, p. 115).
Features of this pottery indicate that ceramic techniques
were well advanced in the earliest deposits at this site:
"Well-made Brown and Black ware vessels with their sophisticated composite shapes and numerous subtypes, flaring-side bowls with simple to wide fiat averted rim; incurved-side bowls with tapered averted rims; composite silhouette bowls, spouted (unsupported) vessels," and others. (ibid.).
,
Human figurine types are especially important at Tres
Zapotes, not only because of Stratigraphic differences, but
also because we have in them a possible stylistic clue to the
origin of the motifs of the colossal heads. In the Lower level
the closely related figurine subtypes A and C were found.
Subtype A has characteristically elaborate turbans which
vary a great deal, wide heavy-jowled, slightly prognathic
faces with punctated eyes, nostrils and mouth. The back of
the head is flat or slightly concave, while ears may or may
not to be represented though large circular ear-plugs are
always present. Some masculine heads appear in this type
with a short beard. (ibid., p. 78).
Many of the figurines have somewhat flattened body
forms representing females more or less impressionistically
treated with wasp waists, small breasts and the navels often
indicated by a punctation. Dress is sometimes indicated by
applique representing necklaces, short skirts, and breech

268

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

clouts. Legs may be simply tapered stems or stubby with
heavy modeled thighs and reduced lower legs with feet
indicated by a few vertical striations sometimes with a deep
notch at the bottom. The arms are in various postures and
are usually stubby in form, while the figures themselves
may be standing or seated.
One figurine head form is that called "Subtype E" or
"Baby-face" variety, of which only one example was found
in the Lower phase. These are modelled realistically, eso
pecially in the eyes and cheek contours. Some of them have
drooping mouths or an appearance of crying (Drucker, 1943a,
pl. 26 e, 270, 38 a, b; Weiant, 1943 pls. 18, 19). This figurine
type is considered to be a basic trait of the Otmec phase.
There is reason to believe that in its realism and simplicity
it may be a proto-type of the beautifully executed colossal
heads ~vhich form another basic trait of this phase.
Middle Tres Zapotes
In Drucker’s words (1943 a, p. 115) this level is characterized as, "a period of elaboration and development," the
Lower level wares continuing to be predominant. However,
"Polychrome ware, whose roots might possibly lie in the
Lower Complex, or more likely at the base of the Middle,
occurs in modest, although constantly increasing, quantity."
Unfortunately poor preservation ruled out intensive study of
the design elements on Polychrome ware.
A diagnostic trait of the Polychrome ware is, "finely divided, compact clay, with no visible temper." Characteristically the color is bright orange, frequently with a gray
core. This ware is quite hard and the vessel walls, even of
large pots, "tend to be thinner than those of other wares"
with thickness ranging from 5/32 to ¥4 inch. (ibid., pp. 3637). Slips include cream, white, buff, gray, orange, and
smoked-black shades.
While vessel forms vary, "the significant characteristic of
the group is that composite silhouettes definitely never occur." On the other hand this form is a moderate constant

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

269

among the Brown and Black wares. Polychrome shapes include flat base, flaring side, curving to flat everted rims,
bowls and dishes some with slab or cascabel feet, while
many were legless. Also found were unsupported spouted
vessels, and ollas with distinctive rims which rise sharply
from the body, usually vertically or slightly flaring (ibid.,
pp. 37-44).
Middle Tres Zapotes figurines give evidence of "manipulation of fundamental patterns," with grotesque subtype B
and subtype F probably being derived from A and C forms
in Lower Tres Zapotes. Another subtype, D, may be extraneous but the punctation technique of the Lower period
is apparent in many specimens.
The Middle period subtype E or "baby face" heads are
more elaborate than the Lower period specimens, many with
forelocks deriving from subtype C.
"It is in the Middle too, that the infrequent bearded forms,
and those with what looks like a muffler about their chins
occur, and the more variant types of bodies, the angular
wide-crotched forked-foot type, and those with tripods, and
socket-like whistles occur" (ibid., p. 115).
Upper Tres Zapotes
Cultural continuum from the lower strata is represented in
this level by a number of persistencies including all the
wares present in the Middle period. Polychrome becomes increasingly abundant at the expense of the monochrome
wares, while Tres Zapotes hand-made figurine types persist
much as before. InnOvations apparently made by the potters
at the end of the Middle period are incensarios and coinages.
However, the most important manifestation of the Upper
period is the "influx of new traits which have no discernible
local antecedents." (ibid., p. 116). Much of this new material
is found in the mounds, the building of which must have
been accelerated at this time.

270

Te~a~ Archeologica~ and Pa~eonto~og~ca! So¢iet1~

While jade carving is a characteristic Olmec trait elsewhere, it is all but absent at Tres Zapotes. Drucker mentions
a jade bead and a pendant, while Weiant (I943, pp. 120-121;
pls. 74-75) devotes a short section and a few photographs to
some small jade beads and ornaments.
We have gone into some detail in discussing the site of
Tres Zapotes because with the stratigraphic sequence established by Drucker (1943), we are able to correlate it temporally with other sites to see how it fits into the Pre-Classic
stage. This can only be done in a general way, for many details are lacking or are too obscure to make more than tentative broad scale correlations. (e. g. Wauchope, 1950).
La Venta
This site is situated on a sandy island between the Tonala
river and its tributary, the Blasillo, somewhat over ten miles
from the ocean and about 90 miles east and somewhat south
of Tres Zapotes. Excavation was carried out by Drucker in
1942 (Stirling and Stirling, 1942), and Stirling and Wedel in
1943 (Stirling, 1943 b).
The largest feature of an architectural nature is a truncated pyramidal mound, on a platform, approximately I00
yards square and 105 feet high (Stirling, 1943 a, p. 48). There
are at least eight other mounds of good size. Covarrubias
(1946 b, p. 92) gives a sketch map of the La Venta site showhug the arrangement of the mounds that could be seen. His
description of the site is the best published thus far; "The
entire complex runs directly in a north-south direction, with
all sorts of mounds--large and small, round and long--neatly
aligned to form extensive plazas." While mounds of the same
general shape may contain vastly different kinds of material, it is of interest to note the existence of long narrow
mounds here and at Tres Zapotes.
A very unique feature at La Venta is to be found north of
the large pyramid. This is a rectangular enclosure measuring 54 by 68 yards surrounded by pillars of columnar basalt
10 feet high arranged side by side, resting on a foundation

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

271

of clay. A sunken court was thus formed, the floor of which
is still undetermined. At the south end of this court is a
gate formed by two smaller rectangular enclosures measuring 21 by 27 feet also made of basalt columns. The easternmost of the small enclosures was found to be filled with
rubble and adobe bricks to a considerable depth. Under this
fill was a cache of 37 serpentine axes arranged in the form
of a cross. Below the axes to a depth of 23 feet the filling was
of earth, while at the bottom was a floor representing a
highly conventionalized jaguar mask. It was made of well
shaped, close fitting blocks of green serpentine set in asphalt
on a base of crushed stone. In the words of Covarrubias,
"The open spaces within the mosaic that stood for the
jaguar’s eyes, eyebrows, nose, and mouth were filled with
blue clay, while a border of yellow ochre framed the green
mosaic, setting it off against the reddish soil of La Venta."
(Covarrubias, 1946 b, pp. 92-93). Another mosaic floor lay
in front of the pyramid.
There are 19 stone monuments known from this site including the two now in Vfllahermosa..Four of these monuments are classified as stelae by Stirling (1943 a). These
range in height from 5 feet to 14 feet. Stela 1 at La Venta
(ibid., p. 50, pl. 33a) bears a close resembiance to Stela A and
D at Tres Zapotes (ibid., pp. 11-16 and pls. 12, 14a). All seem
to represent figures standing in the open mouths of jaguars
or have conventionalized jaguar masks above the figures.
Stela 2 is remarkable in that its half-relief figure wears a
headdress almost as tall as himself. He carries a sort of baton
or mace and is surrounded by six human figures who seem
to have snarling jaguar mouths, and who also carry clublike instruments (for illustration of this see Covarrubias,
1946 b, plate 3 and Stirling, 1943 b, p. 24). Perhaps the most
interesting stela is the largest, Stela 3, which shows in low
relief two figures facing one another. One of these personages has a long beaked nose and a beard, while the face
of the other is mutilated beyond recognition. The second
person wears a very tall headdress and carries a club. These
two personages seem to be surrounded by six figures, one

272

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of which has a snarling jaguar-like face while two of the
others appear to be wearing helmet-like headdresses. Long
nosed personages are represented on Monument C at Tres
Zapotes which bear a certain resemblance to those on Stela 3
at La Venta. (Cf. Stifling, 1943 a, pl. 18 and Covarrubias,
1946 b, pl. 4).
Six monuments are called altars by Stirling. They are
rectangular in shape, about five feet high with the top foot
or so overhanging the lower portion as a sort of table-top.
All of these are badly battered as if some attempt was made
to destroy them. These monuments are particularly important because in their decorative motifs they embody almost
an of the traits which are here considered as diagnostic of
the Olmec phase. Among these are, jaguar m~sks, representations of nude babies with "V" notch in the head, drooping
mouth, figures emerging from the mouth, and simple realistic representations (see Stirling, 1943 a, pp. 52-56, and pls.

ac 41).
Perhaps the most striking class of stone monuments at La
Venta are the colossal heads. There are 4 of them ranging
in height from 6 feet to 8 feet 5 inches. They all appear to
have a definite oriefitation with relation to the great mound.
Monument 1 is erected facing south on a north-south line
near the south base of the large mound. It measures 8 feet
high and nearly 21 feet in circumference. Of the four, this
head most nearly resembles that at Tres Zapotes, with a
sensitively realistic likeness to a person of the physical type
with !arge eyes, broad flat nose, thick lips, and relatively
short face. The curve of the mouth forms an arc with the
ends lower than the center, though it is not "drooping". It
appears to be wearing a helmet-like headdress, another feature which it shares with the specimen at Tres Zapotes. Also
as with the other three here, the back of the head is flat. On
top of the head are a number of rather haphazardly arranged
grooves which may be the result of vandalism. Large ear
plugs are shown decorated with a cross. That the heads may
have been painted is shown by a fragment of this head with

The Obnec Phase I~ East, ern Mexico

273

a smooth-surfaced, dark purplish-red paint coating it. About
200 yards north of the great mound and of the columnar
stone enclosures lay the other three heads arranged in a row
from east to ,;vest. The westernmost of these is Monument 4,
the largest at the site (8 feet 5 inches high, 21 feet 7 inches
in circumference). In common with Monument 1 and the one
at Tres Zapotes it appears to be carved in a life-like manner.
The personage is again wearing a helmet-like headdress, but
the main distinction of this head is to be found in the mouth.
The lips are again full and thick, though parted with the
four upper incisor teeth represented, also a feature of Monument 2 a few yards to the east. Besides the "buck-tooth"
effect, the corners of the mouth appear to be drawn up in a
smile, quite unlike the serious or even dour aspect of the
other heads.
The easternmost of the three heads north of the great
mound is said to be flatter (only 2 feet 9 inches thick) than
the other heads and of a somewhat different style. Much of
its relative crudity may have been due to erosion but even so
there are a number of distinct features about it. Stirling says
that the eyes are large and deep set, but the photograph
(1943 a, pl. 42 b) seems to show two gouges for each eye:
The mouth appears to be unfinished (or else badly eroded)
with the lips slightly parted and the upper incisors vaguely
represented. This head appears not to wear a helmet, the
head having an angular outline from the front. There are
many striated grooves on the back which may be a crude
conventionalization of hair. Circular ear disks are shown
with holes in the center.
A stone carving which Stirling considers the "most typically ’Olmec’" of any at La Venta is that of a human figure
somewhat over four feet high with a "baby-face" complete
with drooping mouth. It is kneeling holding a rectangular
bowl in its hands. Representations of kneeling or squatting
figures holding bowls are to be found at Tres Zapotes in
Monuments I, J, and K (cf. Stifling, 1943 a, pl. 45 a and pl. 9).

274

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Monument 6 at La Venta is a stone sarcophagus, one end
of which is carved in low relief to represent a conventionalized jaguar. It was covered with a slab of stone 10 feet long
by 31/~ feet wide which overlapped the sarcophagus slightly
on al! sides. Burial furniture found in Monument 6 consisted
of two thin circular jade ear plugs to which had been attached a,jade jaguar-claw representation; a serpentine figurine of a nude male with slanting eyes, flat nose and narrow head; and an awl-like implement of jade.
Near the sarcophagus was a tomb constructed of columns
of columnar basalt, called Monument 7. The columns were
set vertically to form a rectangular enclosure on three sides.
’The roof was formed by similar columns laid parallel, while
-the fourth side was formed of columns resting at an angle
:against the last roof column. Three burials were on a platform of clay one foot high, cevered with limestone slabs
which were coated with a thin layer of blue clay. Above this
was an irregular six-inch layer of cinnabar which may have
originally been in wrapped bundles. Among ~he ornaments
were a seated green jade figurine; a standing blue one; a
reproduction of a fresh water clam shell under which was a
seated female jade figurine with a circular mirror of crystalline hematite over the chest; a jade frog; flowers; leaves;
rectangular ear ornaments; jade beads carved like sections
of bamboo; a necklace of sting-ray tails inset with hematite
crystals (one of the sting-ray tails was a jade reproduction) ;
another standing jade figurine; and some jade beads.
The only paper on La Venta pottery is Drucker’s preliminary report (1947). He points out that the pottery is rather
plain, although this may be due partly to poor preservation.
Painting seems to be all but absent. Other decorative techniques are limited to modeling, pre-firing incising, heavy
pre-firing grooving, punctation and rocker stamping, but
these are also infrequent. Paste seems to be very much like
that cf Tres Zapotes pottery with coarse grayish colors, and
a finely divided clay with no temper, fired from orange to
buff as well as black and gray. Drucker prefers to call this

The O~ec Phase

275

ware "Fine Paste" rather than "Polychrome" as he did in
the Tres Zapotes report. He believes that La Venta (and Tres
Zapotes) Fine Paste ware was ancestral to the well known
Fine Orange of central and southern Mexico. It occurs in
the lower La Venta levels (in deposits 9 feet in depth) but
is more frequent near the top.
Vessel shapes compare quite closely with dominant Tres
Zapotes forms. Flat-bottomed low bowls or dishes are common in all wares, while "composite silhouette" bowls occur
but infrequently. With these, as at Tres Zapotes, is associated an elongated "S" design. Footed vessels seem to be
rare or absent at La Venta but annular bases are quite common. These also occur at Tres Zapotes. Drucker states that
the over-all La Venta ceramic pattern is close to that at Tres
Zapotes and specifically to that of the Middle Period.
La Venta figurines are all hand made, usually solid with
applique and incised features. The types are in the main like
those in Middle Tres Zapotes, corroborating the pottery relationships of these two sites.
Because Fine Paste ware occurs rather frequently at the
bottom of the La Venta deposits but not in great abundance
until the Upper period at Tres Zapotes where a number of
Teotihuacan traits are evident, Drucker feels that "the zone
of development of the Fine Paste ceramics must have been
in or near the La Venta region, and that they or at least the
increased emphasis on them, diffused in a westerly direction; that is, to Tres Zapotes, affecting the latter site at the
same time as a series of new influences, presumably from
the Highland, made themselves felt" (1947, p. 6).
The relationship between these two sites is close, but that
one is not merely an adjunct of the other is shown by a
fairly long list of differences. One such dissimilarity is the
presence of a coarse buff ware at La Venta in all strata
which does not occur at Tres Zapotes, nor at any other
known site.

276

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Drucker mentions another Olmec site, that of San Miguel,
not far up the Rio Blasillo from La Venta, but says only
that it, "was presumably an occupation center tributary to
the ritual focus" (ibid., p. 7).
Apropos of occupation sites versus ceremonial centers,
there is reason to believe that more and deeper occupation
deposits will be found at La Venta itself. Such deposits are
extremely hard to find in the jungle, and in fact, all of the
finds now known at La Venta are the results of digging near
monuments which obtrude above ground. Their relationships can be summarized as "well-rooted local manifestations, which, though descended from common ancestral patterns, and though influencing each other throughout their
history, nonetheless were sufficiently well established to
have developed local specialties to which they clung" (ibid.,
p. 6).
San Lorenzo TenochtitIan
The newest and the most spectacular Olmec phase site in
Veracruz was discovered by Stirling in 1946 (Stirling, 1947).
Tenochtitlan is a small village established only about 14
years ago. It is situated on the Rio Chiquito, an affluent of
the Coatzacoalcos. In a direct line the site is 30 miles south
of the Gulf coast, some 60 miles southwest of La Venta, and
70 miles southeast of Tres Zapotes. This village is on two
parallel ridges which run north and south, and four miles
south of it on the same formation but apparently at a somewhat higher elevation are the mounds of San Lorenzo. Stirling speaks interchangeably of these mounds and another
mound group across the river from the village. Apparently
we are dealing with either a very large site or with two very
similar and intimately connected sites. San Lorenzo seems
to be the main one, and it is here that more colossal heads
are found.
The modern village itself is built on archaeological remains,
for Stifling says (p. 157) that the ridge nearest the river is
covered with a series of small mounds which are pre-historic.

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

277

On the ridge 400 yards west is a series of very large mounds,
"including a rectangular court flanked on either side by a
long, high embankment, and at each end by a tall pyramidal
mound--these mounds command a fine view of the spacious
plain below."
At San Lorenzo Stifling mentions that they mapped
mounds, courts and plazas (p. 170), and that there was
a central mound group consisting of a central mound with
a court in front of it containing earthworks (p. 159). There
must, ho~vever, be several courts, since Stirling says that
they excavated in the "principal" court (pp. 160, 170). Stratigraphic trenches were dug at various places at San Lorenzo
and along the river bank below Tenochtitlan. From the excavations were recovered large quantities of pottery, clay
figures, "and other artifacts of the ancient inhabitants and
we were able to trace the changes in style and form with the
passage of time as revealed in our trenches."
Stirling continues: "In our big stratigraphic trenches by
the river we found an early occupation site of the monument
carvers, buried under 20 feet of soft. Above this and 10 feet
beneath the surface was another occupation level with a different style of pottery and different clay figures, showing
that after the site had been abandoned by its original builders another people had arrived and occupied it" (p. 171).
One of the most remarkable features of the Olmec phase
is the apparent distances that they transported huge blocks
of basalt. The only place where outcroppings occur of the
materials from which the stone monuments were carved is in
the Tuxtla mountains in the vicinity of San Andres Tuxtla,
Veracruz. This is only about 15 miles from Tres Zapotes by
air line, but La Venta is 80 miles in a direct line from this
source and probably well over 100 miles by the water routes
they must have taken. San Lorenzo is 60 miles in a direct
line, but a water route from the Gulf and up the Rio Coatzacoalcos would be closer to 100 miles. The argument that they
transported these stones great distances by water is based
on both the swampy nature of the terrain around La Venta

278

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

and the hilly terrain at San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan. Log rafts
could have been made to float the stones.
It is the stone monuments of San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan
that are described in greatest detail by Stirling. These may
be grouped as fol!ows: statuary figures such as colossal
human heads; human figures; animal figures; human and
animal combined; altars; and others including long stone
columns, an aqueduct, and a spherical stone.
By far the most spectacular are the colossal human heads
of the same type of basalt as found in the La Venta monuments. There were five of them, better made and better preserved than any found at La Venta. Two heads are about 9
feet tall, but measurements of the others are not given. They
all wear "football" helmets as do those at La Venta. In the
pictures of one of the heads which is said to be the finest and
largest of all in the "La Venta Culture" the same "Negroid"
physical type is represented in the delicately modeled leatares.
Human figures other than the colossal heads are two small
four-legged rectangular stone vessels each carved with an
Olmec style face, the front legs of the vessels in the form of
recumbent bent elbows. In the jungle on the plain below
San Lorenzo was a well-fashioned Olmec style head, 3 feet
4 inches high. It is made of pitted basalt and wears a headdress or hat consisting of a rounded crown with a thick upturned brim and appears to be not unlike several of the hats
or headdresses depicted on Altars 4 and 5 at La Venta (Stirling, 1943 a, pls. 37, 40, 41), but it is perhaps most similar to
those represented in petroglyph.s at Chalchuapa, E1 Salvador
(Boggs, 1950, fig. 1, d, p. 92). On the site of San Lorenzo is a
statue representing the seated figure of a woman holding a
chubby infant, while another figure of a woman, also seated,
holds a cylindrical bar in her hands. Both of these have their
heads missing.
The figure holding the cylindrical bar may be similar to
a stone monument on the rim of the crater of the San Martin

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

279

Pajapan volcano in central Veracruz. Blom (1926) published
a photograph of this monument and Covarrubias (1946 b, po
80) made a drawing from the photo. This figure is shown
on its knees leaning forward. Its features are pure Olmec
including, drooping mouth, broad nose, and large ear plugs.
The height of the statue is over four feet, one and one-half
feet being taken up with an elaborate headdress, part of
which is a face or mask representation as large as the face
of the personage wearing the headdress.
Most of the animal carvings at San Lorenzo mentioned by
Stifling represent jaguars. One is 3 feet long and depicts a
crouching, snarling jaguar. A similar aspect was found in a
gracefully carved elongated jaguar figure. A four foot high
seated "jaguar god" figure was located in the bottom of ~
ravine at San Lorenzo. One of the animal-human figures i$
described as being in its original position and consisted of,
"a large stone figure-of an anthropomorphic jaguar seated
on a human figure lying on its back with crossed legs"
(Stifling, 1947, p. 158). A better made and larger one wag
discovered at San Lorenzo. The only other human and animal representation was found at Potrero Nuevo about ~:
miles east of San Lorenzo which was "in the form of a heroic
sized human figure holding up a large serpent gracefully
draped over the lap" (p. 171). The author does not say that.
the human figure is of an Olmec type, but the notation oc-curs in context with discussion of finds which are (or were)
Olmec. This point is significant in that it can be said that
negative trait of the Olmec phase is the absence or scarcity
of serpent representations in contra-distinction to a later’
Mexican period wherein serpents became a fundamental
motif. In this connection it is of interest to note the jadeite
figurine from Coatepeque, Guatemala, published by Kidder
(1942, p. 37, fig. 40 d) which depicts an Olmec-looking hu-~
man figure inside the coils of a snake. Appearing especially
Olmec in the front view are the eyes, the shape of the head,
nose and the rounded rectangular ears. But the side view
shows that the head shape is due to hair piled up on top of
the head, and the nose is typically Mayan.

280

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Another animal represented is the duck which occurs in
the form of a stone fount. The swimming bird has the back
hollowed out with sides carved in the form of wings, "and
between them was a series of water glyphs" (Stirling, 1947,
p. 160). On the breast carved in low relief is a small duck
figure with open beak, extended wings and projecting web
feet as if in an attitude of landing.
The monument which ties in most closely with the site of
La Venta is a table-top altar of the same pitted basalt as the
two large altars at the Tabasco site. Not only is the San
Lorenzo altar similar in appearance but it is almost the same
size as the largest one at La Venta (11 feet 4 inches long by
5 feet wide across the top and 6 feet high). The most striking
resemblance is in the front of the altar which bears a human
figure sitting in an arched niche holding what may be a baby
in its lap. There are other carvings on the sides of this altar
in a manner similar to that on the La Venta examples. Quite
different from anything at other Olmec sites is a table-top
altar at San Lorenzo, the top of which appears to be supported by figures in front holding their hands above their
heads. Judging from the workmen standing around the altar
in the photograph, the total height must be about 3 feet,
while supporting figures would be about two feet high.
These figures, carved half-round are remarkable not only
for their "Atlantean" posture but also because of their close
resemblance to some of the handsome clay figurines at Tres
Zapotes and La Venta. They appear to be males wearing
breech clouts and helmet-like head coverings. On the front
side of the top of the altar are four rectangular designs which
may be parts of conventionalized representations of jaguar
eyes (ibid., p. 171 and plate xii).
Another object which may have been an altar or part of
one is a large rectangular stone slab found in a ravine at San
Lorenzo. On one side a shallow depression was carved, leaving a frame-like border around the sides. The flat surface of
the enclosed portion contained six symmetrically-placed depressions in the form of stone celts (votive axes?).

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

281

Stifling found what may have been an aqueduct at San
Lorenzo. He describes a mass of hollowed-out, tile-shaped
stones each measuring about 32 inches long, 15 inches wide
and 10 inches high. With them were a number of flat stones
of the same length and width, which he thinks were used to
cover the others. Since concentrations of these stones appear at three localities stretching over a distance of half a
mile he suggests that they were used to convey water, even
bridging a ravine to do so (ibid., pp. 159-160 and pl. xiii).
Two other types of monuments were found. One was a
spherical stone in circumference about 36.6 inches in diameter reminiscent of h~[onument 3 at Cerro de las Mesas (Stirling, 1943 a, p. 45, pl. 30 d), and one of those recently discovered in Costa Rica. In the deepest level of the river bank
excavations near Tenochtitlan were two granite columns 14
feet long and 2 feet in diameter. This is the first mention of
granite columns in this area.
From stratigraphic evidence there appear to have been at
least two distinct cultural manifestations at the large site
of San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan. This view is corroborated by
the fact that all but one (the jaguar on the human figure in
Tenochtitlan) were removed from their original positions,
usually rolled down into ravines and battered. These ravines
had apparently cut through the site after it had begun to be
occupied. None of the monuments stood in relation to
mounds or mound groups as they did at La Venta and
Tres Zapotes. Another feature that all three sites have in
common is an iconoclastic mutilation of the stone monuments. This does not necessarily mean that the iconoclasts
were all the same people nor that they lived at the sites after
they had done their vandalism. La Venta seems to have been
occupied only once for a period long enough to accumulate 9
feet of debris, yet the monuments there are all battered. In
Upper Tres Zapotes an influx of new traits appear pointing
to the valley of Mexico Teotihuacan III Culture. This could
mean that the people at Tres Zapotes were overrun and
mingled with their conquerors who destroyed their captives’

282

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

works of religious (?) art. Even though the evidence indicates that La Venta was probably no longer occupied at this
time, the supposed conquerors may have gone down there
and wreaked havoc on the abandoned site.
It is not, however, necessary to postulate invasion from
outside peoples. In the first place we do not know when the
monuments were battered. Secondly, internal revolt among
the inhabitants could be postulated. That would make it
somewhat easier to explain why La Venta monuments were
mutilated also. An argument against the internal revolt
theory is that we know that strong new influences did come
in at Tres Zapotes. San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan was probably
contemporary with La Venta and therefore with Middle
Tres Zapotes, as evidenced by the colossal heads, the stone
altar and perhaps the stone columns.
Cerro de las Mesas is another site which shows some
Olmec influences. Drucker does not consider it an Olmec
site. It is affiliated with Tres Zapotes in that they have i~
common certain widespread Pre-Classic ceramic traits. He
indicates that the bulk of Cerro de las Mesas culture -pottery, figurines, jade-carvings and stelae, "represent transplantations of Highland patterns" (1947, p. 7).
Extent of Olmec Traits
Much has been written on the Olmec problem, especially
since the round table conference in 1942 (see: Mayas y
Olmecas, 1942). This was held for the express purpose of
examining the archaeology, physica! anthropology, linguistics, ethnography, and history of the region. The meeting
was held while stratigraphic excavation was still being cartied on at La Venta.
Since at that time La Venta was believed to represent the
purest manifestation of "Olmec" culture, the conference decided that the name should be changed to "La Venta Culture". Apparently not all were in accord, for Covarrubias,
the most prolific writer on the Olmec and their art, prefers
to continue the use of "Olmec culture". Drucker states that

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

283

"Olmec", with its "shadowy ethnic connotations", is perhaps
not the best choice, but "La Venta Culture" is even worse
because it "should more properly be restricted to the particular component or horizon of Olmec culture represented
there" (1947, p. 1). Stirling entitled his last (1947) publication on this area "On the Trail of La Venta Man," yet often
refers to the Olmecs or to "Olmec Art."
A long list of "La Venta Culture" traits was given at the
conference to which Stifling added a number which had
not been encountered anywhere but at La Venta. It is not
necessary to list all these traits here, since most of them
have been given in the site discussions above, while others
are not acceptable on the grounds that they are too widespread to be diagnostic of the Olmec phase (e. g., use of
jade, clay figurines in Tres Zapotes style, and various types
of ear plugs).
Jirnenez-lYIoreno presented to the assemblage an all-inclusive scheme to account for the Olmecs from Pre-historic
times to the historic period. The scheme is based on linguistic, historic and legendary evidence and was published in
full later the same year (1942 a; 1942 b). He postulates five
Olmec periods consisting of Pr~e-, Proto-, Paleo-, Neo- and
Post-Olmec, grouping known and unknown peoples under
these various categories.
However, Covarrubias (1946, pp. 122-124) goes even farther than does Jimenez-Moreno in attributing almost all
Mexican and Central American prehistory to one or another
Olmec stage. While there are in the Jimenez-Moreno and
Covarrubias schemes a few points which may be acceptable
and eventually verified, for the most part the hypothesis
has not been borne out by known facts. In attributing most
of. Meso-American Pre-Classic and Classic cultures to an
Olmec root and stem, the term Olmec is rendered almost
meaningless. We are left with a vague regional delineation,
not a concise workable concept.
Krickeberg (1950) uses Jimenez-Moreno’s framework, but

284

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society ....................

interprets the known data somewhat more cautiously than
the above authors. His use of the. term Old Olmec corresponds roughly to what is here called the "Olmec Phase,"
and his evaluation of the role of the "Old Olmec" in Mesoo
American pre-history appears to be essentially tenable.
Covarrubias is the unsurpassed expert on Olrnec art and
many of his interpretations of it can be accepted, but an
art style is not synonymous with a culture or a way of life.
Several aspects of the problem brought out by him are quite
important. One is what he calls perhaps the most characteristic Olmec trait, the drooping mouth. This trait apparently
originated at our postulated culture center of Tres ZapotesLa Venta. However, it was one of the traits which persisted
longest in Meso-America, probably in conjunction with a
jaguar cult which may also have had its beginnings at the
culture center in southern Veracruz and Tabasco.
Another suggestion by Covarrubias is that the Olmec
phase can possibly be divided into sub-periods which may
correspond to the three periods at Tres Zapotes. When we
know more about San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan, we can work
it into the scheme. Certainly part of the occupation of that
site corresponds to the La Venta-Middle Tres Zapotes period.
With regard to contemporary relationships outside our
area there are first of all certain relationships with the
early periods of Uaxactun, Guatemala. In comparing ceramics of Lower Tres Zapotes to Mamom, Drucker (1943, p.
118) finds parallels in punctate faces on olla necks and
small whistles in the form of birds with loops on the back
of the heads for suspension. In figurines he points out certain
resemblances to some at Uaxactun and even to Kaminaljuyu
in the Highlands of Guatemala, from which came "figurines
similar in form to Tres Zapotes B and E subtypes" (p. 119).
It is interesting to note that punctated nipples and navels are
among the figurine body features from La Venta (Drucker,
1947, pl. 6 d, e, f) a feature of some Uaxactun figurines
(Ricketson and Ricketson, 1937, pl. 70, a-c, e, g-w). Drucker
says that "it can scarcely be doubted that we are dealing

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

285

with a single monochrome handmade figurine complex that
extended from the Peten to (at least) southern Veracruz."
There are some resemblances between Lower Tres Zapotes
and the Tampico-Panuco area in that they both show some
relations to Mamom-Chicanel pottery. From Tampico-Panuco
comes a ware called E1 Prisco Black (Ekholm, 1944) which
is somewhat similar to Chicanel redware, while according
to Robert Smith, the early Tres Zapotes monochrome pottery is even more closely related to Chicanel than is E1
Prisco Black. Ekholm makes Lower Tres Zapotes equivalent
to his Period I at the Pavon site of Panuco on the basis of
pottery, while in figurine types there is closer correlation
of his Period II with Lower Tres Zapotes. This is because of
the great similarity of Panuco type A to Tres Zapotes type
A figurines (.ibid., pp. 445-446). Later contact between the
two sites is not indicated for the respective figurine types
diverge greatly.
Quite significant is the fact that Vaillant’s type D figurine
bodies (bulbous thighs, stubby arms) occur prominently at
Tlatilco in the Valley of Mexico, and in Period II at the
Pavon site at Panuco. There are also certain similarities
between Tlatilco and the Olmec sites. Two figurines found
at Tlatilco tie this site in with the Olmec phase (Covarrubias, 1943, p. 43).
As for the La Venta-Middle Tres Zapotes periods, Drucker
suggests that because there are no Highland influences at
La Venta perhaps that period lasted somewhat longer at the
latter site than it did at Tres Zapotes. He speaks of a rough
equation of this period with the Tzakol (early Classic)
period in the Lowland Maya region of Guatemala. Kidder
(1948, p. 343) agreed with Drucker, but he admits now
(personal communication) that in view of radiocarbon
dates at Tlatilco, the estimates of the age of La Venta and
Middle Tres Zapotes may have to be revised downward.
Olmec traits which have been neglected so far in this
paper are the carved jade figurines of crying babies, bold
nude humans, dwarfs and deformed people. Their wide dis-

Tep~as Archeologicgl g~d Paleontological Societ~l

tribution points, I believe, not to a farflung Olmec culture, but rather to the fact that these beautiful little statuettes would have an esthetic value to almost anyone. Therefore their presence in later sites does not appear to be particularly significant. A polished stone figurine probably of
an Olmec type has been found as far north as Baffin Bay on
the Texas Coast (personal communication, Alex D. Krieger).
Another comes from as far south as Guanacaste, Costa Rica
(Lines, 1942; Covarrubias, 1946a, fig. 18). Since at least 10
handsome examples occur at La Venta (Stirling, 1942, ph 1;
1943 b, pl. IV) they can truly be considered as Olmec. This
is also true of votive axes which often bear conventionalized
jaguar features (Stirling, 1943 b, pls. I, IV). As for jade
working, Kidder (1946, pp. 104 if) has shown that this art
was widespread throughout Meso-America at a fairly early
date.
Drucker’s comments on diagnostic Olmec traits (1947,
pp. 6-7) are important. He points out that "attempts have
been made to delimit the Olmec area on the basis of the
distribution of finds of Olmec figurines, particularly those
of jade, but objects so portable are less trustworthy markers
of culture than such things as stone monuments in the
characteristic art style, ceramic complexes and patterns of
mound construction."

Fairly certain evidence of the presence of Olmec phase
people in an area are stone carvings which are on native
rock or stones too large to be readily moved. We have such
an example in the Highlands of Central Mexico in the state
of Morelos where the site of Chalcacingo has a series of basreliefs with pronounced Olmec features (Covarrubias, 1946
a, p. 171 drawing; Drucker, 1947, p. 8 notation). A petroglyph
carving apparently executed by an Olmec artist has been
found on a boulder at San Isidro Piedra Parada, Quetzaltenango, Guatemala (Thompson, 1943, p. 104, llla, photo;
Covarrubias, 1946 a, drawing). Olmec artisans apparently
got down as far as Chalchuapa, E1 Salvador, where, in the
Las Victorias group, are a series of petroglyphs also on large

The Olmec Phase In Easter~ Mexico

287

immovable rocks in good Olmec style (Boggs, 1950). All of
these probably represent wanderings, -visits or trading *~rips
by Olmec people, since it has not been established that there
is a true Olmec site outside of the southern VeracruzTabasco area.

Using the criteria of architecture, stone monuments, ceramics, figurines, and to some extent jade carvings, we can
state that there existed at three sites in the PapaloapanCoatzacoalcos-Tonala drainages of southern Veracruz and
Tabasco a well integrated culture complex which we call
the Olmec phase. These three components, Tres Zapotes, La
Venta and San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan suggest a fairly long
history within the Pre-Classic stage, which lasted perhaps
into the Classic. There are apparently three subdivisions of
the Olmec phase, based on the ceramic stratigraphy at Tres
Zapotes. The two earliest developed on a Pre-Classic base
with little or no outside influence, but the third period shows
indications of strong influences from the Classic culture of
Teotihuacan and may equate in time also to the Tzakol or
Classic Maya period.
Knowledge of the area under consideration is too scant
to postulate any reasons for the presence, rise or decline of
the Olmec phase culture. A number of Olmec traits persisted
into much later periods. Among these were large earth
mounds, monumental stone carving, drooping-mouth-jaguar
motif and perhaps some skill in jade carving. Traits which
they developed but which did not pass out of their area
were: realistic carving of colossal stone heads, use of columnar basalt for enclosures and tombs, and serpentine mosaic floors. Apparently developed by the Olmec and persisting for some time afterward but probably not into late
Classic times, was the manufacture of small human figurines
representing crying-babies, jaguars, dwarfs and deformed
people. Also in this category are the small votive axes.
The carriers of the Olmec phase culture were a dynamic,

288

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

resourceful and technically capable people who for a time
excelled their immediate neighbors, and left very significant influences on the cultures which followed.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abbreviations
AAmAmerican Anthropologist.
BAE-B--Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin.
CA--Cuadernos Americanos.
CIPmCarnegie Institution of Washington, Publications.
NGM--National Geographic Magazine.
SAA-M--Society for American Archaeology, Memoirs.
Armillas, P.
1948. A sequence of cultural development in MesoAmerica. SAA-M, No. 4. American Antiquity, Vol. 13,
part 2, Menasha, pp. 105-111; 116.
Blom, F. and Oliver La Farge.
1926. Tribes and Temples: a record of the expedition
to Middle America conducted by the Tulane University
of Louisiana in 1925. Vol. 1. New Orleans.
Boggs, S. H.
1950. Pictographs in Las Victorias Group, Chalchuapa
Archaeological Zone, E1 Salvador. Carnegie Institution
of Washington, Notes on Middle American Archaeology
and Ethnology, No. 99.
Charnay, Desire.
1887. The ancient cities of the New World, being travels
and explorations in Mexico and Central America from
1857 to 1882. London.
Covarrubias, M.
1943a. La Venta. Colossal heads and jaguar gods. Dyn.
%rol. 1, No. 6, pp. 24-33. Mexico.
1943b. Tlatilco, archaic Mexican art and culture. Dyn.

The Olmec Phase In Easter~ Me~’~co

289

Vol. 1, No. 4-5, pp. 40-46. Mexico.
1946a. El arte "Olmeca" o de La Venta. CA, Vol. 28,
No. 4, pp. 153-179. Mexico.
1946b. Mexico south. The Isthmus of Tehuantepec. New
York.
1950. Tlatilco; El arte y la cultura Preclasica del Va~e
de Mexico. CA, Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 149o162. Mexico.
Drucker, P.
1943a. Ceramic sequences at Tres Zapotes, Veracruz,
Mexico, BAE-B 140.
1943b. Ceramic stratigraphy at Cerro de las Mesas,
Veracruz, Mexico. BAE-B 141.
1947. Some implications of the ceramic complex of La
Venta. Smithsonian Institution, Misc. Collections, Vol.
107, No. 8. Washington
Ekholm, G. F.
1944. Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. Amer. Mus. o5 Nat. Hist., Anthro. Papers,
Vol. 38, part V, pp. 319-512. New York.
Holmes, W. H.
1907. On a nephrite statuette from San Andres Tuxtla,
Veracruz, Mexico. A.A, n.s., Vol. 9, pp. 691-701. Lancaster.
Jimenez-Moreno, W.
1942a. Relacion entre los olmecas, los toltecas y los
mayas, segun las tradiciones. In, Mayas y Olmecas, pp.
19-23.
1942b. E1 enigma de los olmecas. CA, Vol. 5, pp. 113145. Mexico.
Joyce, T. A. and H. A. Knox.
1931. Sculptured figures from Vera Cruz State, Mexico.
Man, Vol. 31, No. 19, p. 17.
Kidder, A. V.
1942.

Archaeological

specimens

from

Yucatan

and

290

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Guatemala. Carnegie Inst. of Washington, Div. ol Hist.
Research, Notes on Mid. Amer. Arch. and Ethnol. Vol. 1,
No. 9, pp. 35-40. Washington.
1948. Review of, Mexico South, by M. Covarrubias.
American Antiquity, Vot. 13, No. 4, part 1, pp. 342-343.
Menasha.
Kidder, A. V., J. D. Jennings, and E. M. Shook.
1946.
ton.

Excavations at Kaminaljuyu. CIP 561. Washing-

Krickeberg, Walter.
1950. Olmeken und Tolteken. Nach den :[ungsten Ergebnissen der mexikanischen Archaologie. Zeitschrift fur
Ethnologie, Band 75, pp. 13-35.
Lines, J. A.
1942. Un "baby face, en Costa Rica. In, Mayas y Olmeo
cas, p. 54.
Mayas y Olmecas.
1942. Segunda reunion de mesa redonda sobre problemas, anthropologicos de Mexico y Centro America.
Soc. Mex. de Antrop. Mexico.
Melgar, J. M.
1869. Antiguedades Mexicans. Bol. Soc. Mex. Geogr.
y Estad., 2nd ep; tome I, pp. 292-297. Mexico.
1871. Estudio sobre la antiguedad y el origen de la
Cabeza Colosal de tipo etiopico que existe en Hueyapam.
Bol. Soc. Mex. Geogr. y Estad., 2nd, ep., tome 3, pp. 104109. Mexico.
Morley, S. G.
1946. The Ancient Maya. Stanford University, Calif.
Ricketson, O. G., Jr., and E. B. Ricketson.
1937. Uaxactun, Guatemala Group E--1926-1931. CIP
477. Washington.
de Sahagun, B.
1830. Historia general de la cosas de Nueva Espana.
Vols. 1-3. (Bustamente Edition).

The O~ec P~a~e I~ Eoate~ Me~co

291

Saville, M. H.
1929. Votive axes from ancient Mexico. Mus. of the
Amer. Ind. Heye Foundation, Indian Notes, Vol. 6, No.
3, pp. 266-269, 335-342. New York.
Seler-Sachs, C.
1922. Altertumer des kanton Tuxtla im staate Vera
Cruz. Festschrift Eduard Seler, pp. 543-556. Stuttgart.
Steward, J. H.
1948. A functional-developmental classification of American high cultures. SAA-M, No. 4, American Antiquity,
Vol. 13, No. 4, part 2, pp. 103-104. Menasha.
1949. Cultural causality and law: a trial formulation
of the development of early civilizations. AA n.s., Vol.
51, No. 1, pp. 1-27. Menasha.
Stirling, Marion.
1941. Jungle housekeeping for a geographic expedition.
NGM, Vol. 80, No. 3, pp. 303-327. Washington.
Stirling, Matthew W.
1939. Discovering the New World’s oldest dated work
of man. NGM, Vol. 76, No. 2, pp. 183-218. Washington.
1940a. An initial series from T~es Zapotes, Vera Cruz,
Mexico. Natl. Geogr. Soc., Contrib. Tech, Papers, Mex.
Arch. Set., Vol. 1, No. 1. Washington.
1940b. Great stone faces of the Mexican jungle. NGM,
Vol. 78, No. 3, pp. 309-334. Washington.
1941. Expedition unearths buried masterpieces of carved jade. NGM, Vol. 80, No. 3, pp. 277-302. Washington.
1942a. Recientes hallazgos en La Venta. In, Maya y
Olmecas, pp. 56-58.
1943a. Stone monuments of southern Mexico. BAE-B
138. Washington.
1943b. La Venta’s green stone tigers. NGM, Vol. 84, No.
3, pp. 321-332. Washington.
1947. On the trail of La Venta Man. NGM, Vol. 91, No.
2, pp. 137-172. Washington.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

292

Stifling, Matthew W., and Marion Stirling.
1942. Finding jewels of jade in a Mexican swamp.
NGM, Vol. 82, No. 5, pp. 635-661. Washington.
Thompson, J. E. S.
1941. Dating of certain inscriptions of non Maya origin. Carnegie Inst. o~ Washington, Div. o~ Hist. Research,
Theoretical Approaches to Problems, No. 1. Wash.
1943. Some sculptures from southeastern Quetzaltenango, Guatemala. Carnegie Inst. o] Washington, Div. o]
His~. Research, Notes on Mid. Arner. Arch. and Ethnol.,
Vol. 1, No. 17, pp. 100-112. Washington.

V~illant,
1930. Excavations at Zacatenco. Amer. Mus. of Nat.
Hist., Anthro. Pap., Vol. 32, part 1, pp. 1-197. New York.
1931. A bearded mystery. Natural History, Vol. 31, No.
3, pp. 241-252. New York.
1932. A pre-Columbian jade. Natural History, Vol. 32,
No. 6, pp. 512-520, 557-558. New York.
1941. Aztecs of Mexico. Garden City.
Vaillant, G. C. and Suzannah B. Vaillant.
1934. Excavations at Gualapita. Amer. Mus. o] Nat,.
Hist,., Anthro. Pap., Vol. 35, part 1, pp. 1-135. New York.
Wauchope, R.
1950. A tentative sequence of pre-classic ceramics in
Middle America. Mid. Amer. Research Rec., Mid. Amer.
Res. Inst., Tulane Univ., Vol. 1, No 14, pp. 211-250. New
Orleans.
Wyerstall, A.
1932. Some observations on Indian mounds, idols and
pottery in the lower Papaloapan basin, State of Vera
Cruz, Mexico. Mid. Amer. Research Series, Vol. 4, pp.
23-69.
Vol. 4, pp. 23-69. New Orleans.

THE AGE OF THE MELBOURNE INTERVAL
I~vn,rG Rous~
In a recently published monograph on the archaeology of
the Indian River region in eastern Florida (Rouse, 1951,
21-34), the writer had occasion to define the following
sequence of ecological periods:
i. Anaslasia Interw_L The sea covered the Indian River area,
causing the accumulation of a layer of sea shells known as the
Anastasia Formation.
2. Anastasia-Melbourne IntervaL The sea fell and erosion took
place, producing an unconformity at the top of the Anastasia Formation.
3. Melbourne Interval The sea again rose, although not to such
an extent as to cover the Indian River area, and a second cycle of
deposition ensued. Authorities diHer as to the setting: ~resh water
marshes and/or areas partially intmdated by the sea. In any case,
various land mammals became trapped in the deposits to such an
extent that it is now known as the Melbourne bone bed.
4. Melbourne-Van Valkenburg Interval Another fall in the sea
level led to a second period of erosion and to an unconformity on
top of the Melbourne Formation.

5. Van Valkenburg Interval Most recently, the sea and, inland,
the water table have been rising; both salt- and fresh-water marshes
have formed; and deposition is once more taking place in them.
It is generally agreed that the first two of these intervals
are interglacial and glacial respectively and the last two,
postglacial. On the other hand, the intervening Melbourne
Interval is the subject of much controversy, some authors
believing that it, too, was interglacial; others, that it dates
from a recession during the last glacial period; and still
others, that it may be postglacial (cf. I-Iay, 1923, pp. 381-3;
Gross, 1951, p. 116; and Rouse, 1951, pp. 31, 33). Simpson
(1929, p. 262) perhaps best stated the case when he Said that
its age is "very dubious."
*Contribution from the Caribbean Anthrol)ological Program of the Yale Peabody
Museum, The support of this program by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for
thro~ological Research, Inc. is acknowledged, and I also wish to express my
~)r~ciation to Alex D. Krieger for his advice and for suggesting that I writ~
article.

294

Texas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Society

Since our monograph was primarily concerned with archaeology and none of the archaeological material then
known seemed to date back as far as the Melbourne Interval, l we devoted relatively little space to the controversy
concerning the age of that interval. However, new material
has since been obtained which indicates that man may
actually have been present when the Melbourne Formation
was laid down,Z and therefore it will perhaps be worthwhile
to review the various possible hypotheses concerning its age.
The di~t’iculty in dating the Melbourne Interval arises
from the fact that there are two main lines of approach to
the problem, each of which leads to a different solution. One
approach is based upon the nature of the mammalian fauna,
which includes such characteristically interglacial animals
as the Columbian elephant, mastadon, horse, and sloth. The
presence of these mammals led Hay (1923, pp. 381-3), for~
example, to place the Melbourne Formation in the Second
Interglacial (Yarmouth).
The other approach is based upon the nature of the sealevel changes. These happen to be particularly well recorded
in the stratigraphy of the Indian River area because the
region is low and flat, so that its drainage was affected to a
maximum extent by each rise and fall in the level of the sea.
Geologists (e.g., Parker, 1945, p. 21) have concluded that the
level of the land in the area has not changed since midglacial time. Hence, the rise in the level of the sea during the
Melbourne Interval must have been purely eustatic, and its
level can be compared with that in other areas of purely
eustatic change, such as southern England, where it has been
possible to date the various levels of the sea. Applying the
dates for southern England to the Indian River succession
of levels, we have come to the conclusion that the Melbourne
Interval must have been in existence during Early and

I. In the wrlter’a opinion, the remains of the ~o-called Vere and Melbourno
Mar~, which have been found in th~ Melbourne Formation. are intrtmlve.
2. William E. Edward~, of Columbia University and the Florida Geologlea]
Survey, has discovered a new type of material which may well be contemporaneous
with the Melbourne Formation.
Edwards’ material is unpublished, and therefor~
ean not be di~useed here.

The Age o] the Melbourne Interval

295

Middle Postglacial times, i.e., during the Anathermal and
Aititl~ermal (postglacial optimum), to use Antevs’ terms
(Rouse, 1951, p. 31; Antevs, 1948, pp. 7-15).
We have, then, a marked discrepancy. The vertebrate
fauna indicates an interglacial date, whereas the level of
the sea points to postglacial time. No other fruitful line of
approach has yet been found. The flora and invertebrate
fauna are not diagnostic, and we have too little evidence on
the climate and human associations to be able to draw any
conclusions from them (Rouse, 1951, pp. 31-2). We are only
able, therefore, to suggest possible solutions to this problem.
One solution would be to modify the sea-level chronology.
This was the approach followed by Gross (1951, p. 116) when
he wrote in the last issue of this Bulletin, without giving
reasons, that the level of the sea during the Melbourne Interval "argues . . . in favor of a temperate Wisconsin interstadial . . . (most probably Peorian)." Gross failed, however, to take it into consideration that glacial geologists in
this countm] have generally abandoned the theory of a
Peorian recession marked enough to have raised the sea
to its level during the Melbourne inter~alwpresumably e
little higher than at present (e.g., Antevs, 1948, pp. 2-5;
Flint, 1947, pp. 267-76). As we have pointed out (Rouse,
1951, p. 31), there is no reason to believe that the sea, in
rising from its Wisconsin low, reached the level of the
Melbourne Interval before the Altithermal or postglacial
optimum.
An alternative possibility is that the bones of the Melbourne fauna have intruded into their present position from
an earlier formation. Cooke (19~5, p. 305) made this sug-.
gestion with respect to the Vero site, but Sellards (1947, pp.
962-4), who is perhaps the leading authority on the Mel-bourne Formation, has argued against it and we see no
reason to doubt his arguments.
A third possible solution would be to assume that the
glacial fauna survived longer on the Florida peninsula than

296

Te~r~zs Archeological and Paleontoloflica~ SocietN

elsewhere, owing, perhaps, to its peripheral position relative to the North American land mass. This has been our
preferred solution. Gross (op. cir.), on the other hand, has
rejected it, apparently because he finds it inconceivable that
such a survival could have taken place, although to us it
seems not incomparable with the known survival of the
sloth in Cuba and Hispaniola until proto-historic time (e.g.~
Aguayo, 1950).
This third solution could perhaps be made more palatable
if we were to suppose that the bones were laid down in the
Melbourne bed only while the sea was rising to its Altitherreal peak, and not after it had begun to fall from that peak,
as Gross (op. cir.) assumed when he stated that the theory
of survival requires the Melbourne fauna to have persisted
"up to about 1800 B. C." (or rather, 2000 B. C.; Gross cited
our preliminary estimate instead of our final date: Rouse,
1951, p. 262). Indeed, if it is true that the animals became
mired in marshes, their extinction may well have been due
to the growth of the marshes as the result of the rise in sea
level during the first half of the Melbourne Interval.
In other words, the age of the Melbourne Formation, as
indicated by its extinct fauna, may not have coincided with
that of the Melbourne Interval, defined in terms of sea-level
changes. This seems to us to be the most plausible means of
reconciling the discrepancy between the paleontological and
sea-level Chronologies. If the Melbourne fauna did survive
only during the first part of the Melbourne Interval, i.e.,
during the Anathermal and the beginning of the Altitherreal, we might suggest a date of about 4000 B. C. for its
extinction, using Antevs’ latest estimate as to the age of the
Altithermal (Antevs, 1952, Chart 1).
The Melbourne Interval would then be somewhat later.
In this connection, it is perhaps worth citing several radiocarbon dates which have appeared since our monograph was
published and which give some idea of both the beginn!n"g
and the end of the Melbourne Interval. One is the date for
the Mankato substage in the Wisconsin glaciation, which

The A~e o~ the Melbourne l~terva!

297

Flint and Deevey (1951, pp. 261-9) give as ca. 9000 B. C.
Since the Mankato should correlate with our AnastasiaMelbourne Interval, this provides an upper limit for the
succeeding Melbourne Interval. As for the lower limit, we
may cite a series of radiocarbon determinations for the
Archaic cultural horizon in the eastern United States, which
cluster around 3000 B. C. (Libby, 1952, pp. 77-8). Since the
Archaic horizon is correlated in the Indian River area with
the Melbourne-Van Valkenburg Interval, following the Melbourne, it would appear that the latter ended about 3000 B. C.
This dosing date is somewhat earlier than our previous
estimate of 2000 B. C. and it similarly fails to agree with
Antevs’ latest estimate of 2000 B. C. for the end of the Altithermal (Antevs, 1952, Chart 1). In addition, we might note
that Flint, after surveying the Pleistocene radiocarbon dates,
has arrived at a tentative estimate of 1500 to 2000 B. C. for
the Cochrane substage of the Wisconsin glaciation in the
Great Lakes area, following the postglacial optimum.s Since
the Cochrane stage should have been contemporaneous with
the low sea level of the Melbourne-Van Valkenburg Interval, Flint’s estimate, too, may be taken to indicate a somewhat later closing time for the Melbourne Interval than is
suggested by the radiocarbon dates for the Archaic horizon.
As a result, we are inclined to retain our original estimate
of 2000 B. C. for the end of the Melbourne Interval.
To summarize, we have suggested that the Melbourne
Formation may have been laid down only during the first
part of the Melbourne Interval, i.e., during the Anathermal
and first half of the Altithermal or postglacial optimum. If
this is so, the Melbourne fauna probably became extinct
about 4000 B. C. The Melbourne Interval, on the contrary,
probably lasted through both the Anathermal and Altitherreal, i.e., from about 9000 to 2000 B. C. It should be stressed
that these dates are largely hypothetical and that much
~. Flint, personal communication. Se~ also Kenneth P. Oakley in Tax, E|sele~’,
Rouse, and Voegelin, 1952, Chapt. 2, Sec. 4. Antevs (op. c|t.), on the contrary,
plae~ the Coehrane befor~ the po~t-glacial optimum.

298

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

work needs to be done before they can be safely accepted.
The most that can be said for them is that they seem to provide the best means of reconciling the discrepancy between
the chronologies based upon fauna and sea-level changes.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aguayo, C. Guillermo.
1950. "Observaciones sobre algunos mamlferos cubanos
extinguidos." Bolet~n de Historia Natural de la Sociedad
"FeIipe Poey," No. 3, pp. 121-34. Habana.
Antevs, Ernst.
1948. "The Great Basin, with Emphasis on Glacial and
Postglacial Times." University o] Utah Bulletin, Vol. 38,
No. 20, pp. 168-91. Salt Lake City.
1952. "Climatic History and the Antiquity of Man in
California." In "Symposium on the Antiquity of Man
in California," Reports o~ the University o~ California
Archaeological Survey, No. 16, pp. 23-9. Berkeley.

Cooke, C. Wythe.
1945. "Geology of Florida." Florida Geological Survey,
No. 29. Tallahassee.
Flint, Richard Foster.
1947. "Glacial Geology and the Pleistocene Epoch. New
York.
Flint, Richard Foster, and Edward S. Deevey, Jr.
1951. "Radiocarbon Dating of Late Pleistocene Events."
American Journal o] Science, Vol. 249, pp. 257-300. New
Haven.
Gross, Hugo.
1951. "Mastodon, Mammoth, and Man in America."
Bulletin of Texas ArcheologicaZ and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 101-31. Lubbock.
Hay, Oliver P.
1923. "The Pleistocene of North America and its Vet-

The A~e o~ the Me~bo~e

299

tebrated Animals from the States East of the Mississippi
River and from the Canadian Provinces East of Longitude 950.’’ Publications o~ the Carnegie Institution o~
Washington, No. 322. Washingto~L
Libby, Willard F.
1952.

Radiocarbon Dating. Chicago.

Parker, Gerald G.
1945. "The Effect of the Pleistocene Epoch on the Geology and Ground Water of Southern Florida." Quarterly
Journal, Florida Academy of Science, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp.
119-43. Gainesville.
Rouse, Irving.
1951. "A Survey of Indian River Archaeology, Florida."
Yale University Publications in Anthropology, No. 44_
New Haven.
Sellards, E. H.
1947. "Early Man in America: Index to Localities and
Selected Bibliography, 1940-1945." Bulletin o~ the Geological Society o~ America, Vol. 58, pp. 955-78. New York.

Simpson, George Gaylord.
1929. "The Extinct Land Mammals of Florida." Annual
Report o~ the Florida Geological Survey, No. 20, pp. 22980. Tallahassee.
Tax, Sol; Loren C. Eisely; Irving Rouse; and Carl F. Voegelin (editors).
1952. An Apprai~aI o:~ Anthropology Today. Chicago.

300

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

KARL SCHMITT,
1915-1952
It will be a long time before the members of our Society,
and anthropologists everywhere, recover from the shock of
Karl’s tragic death at Magdalena, New Mexico, on August 6.
On a vacation tour with Iva and the two children, they had
spent two days at the archaeological camp of our Editor,
Curry Holden, then another two days at a camp supervised
by Jane Holden near Corona, New Mexico. Then, at Magdao
lena, a few hours after leaving the latter camp, their car was
struck by a train, which suddenly backed up without warning. Ira received a fractured hip from which she is now
recovered, and the children fortunately escaped entirely.
To those who knew Karl it is hardly necessary to attempt
an expression of the intense affection and admiration we
felt for him. A big, hearty, spirited man, he attacked a host
of archaeological and ethnological problems with unbounded
enthusiasm. Coming to the Department of Anthropology at
the University of Oklahoma in 1947, Karl embarked upon
many projects:

excavations in southern Oklahoma, and

studies of the modern Caddo and Wichita Indians, their
history, ethnology, music, dances, ceremonies, and mythology, not to mention their many personal problems of relationships .with white civilization. To each of the Indians they
met, men, women, and children, Karl and Ira became close
friends, not only as scientists, but as warm and understandLug human beings.
We learn that Iva has been offered Karl’s position at the
University of Oklahoma. To her we extend our deep sympathies and wish her every success in carrying on.
ALEX KRLEGER.

Karl Schmit:t:

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
THE 1951 ANNUAL MEETING
The twenty-fourth annual meeting of the Society was held in
Junior College auditorium at San Angelo on October 27, 1951. On
the evening before, Judge and Mx& O. L. Sims and 1M_r. and Mrs.
Harry E. Weaver entertained approximately eighty members and
guests of the Society with a dinner at the Weaver’s ranch home
twenty miles north of San Angelo. The evening was most convivial and will long be remembered.
The following papers were presented:
Dr. Robert E. Bell, "Excavations in the Tenkiller Reservoir,
Cherokee County, Oklahoma."

Charles Proctor, "Exploration in the ’Enfoula Reservoir, Eastern Oklahoma."
Dr. Karl Schmitt, "Wichita and Caddo Burial Customs."
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, "The Rock’port Focus."
Edward 5elks, "The Towash Indians and the Stansbury Site."
Jane Holden, "A Further Repor~ on the Bonnell Site."
Dr. E. I-I. Sellards, "Recent Evidence Concerning the Age of
Folsolm Man."
Glen Evans, "Archaeological Problems in the Dune Belts of
the High Plains."
Dr. Erik Reed, ’~fhe Historic Range of the American Bison."
Alex Krieger, "North American Archaeology in the Light of
Radiocarbon Datings."
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, "Two Mineralized Skulls from Texas."
R. B. Worthington, "Houston Area Archaeo!ogy."
THREE SITES NEAR BAYTOWN
On May 26, 1952, 1Yir. W. L. Atwood of 501 Ruth Street, Baytown, Texas, wrote us as follows (see Figure 19 for locations):
"I am attaching a section of a map covering three sites in east
Harris and Chambers counties. The material sent from Devil’s
Elbow came from an old midden which is believed to have been
occupied by an Atakapan tribe, perhaps the BidaL The Arkrokisi
pottery is a little different, being somewhat thinner, rarely incised,
but usual.ly with a scalloped decoration on the top of the rim.
You will notice on the map that an old county road goes right
through the bend marked "Devil’s Elbow." This road has since
been abandoned and the ferry is no longer in use, traffic now
going over a bascule bridge at the mouth of Cedar Bayou. On
the west bank of Cedar Bayou stream, starting at the bascule
bridge, are pre-historic mounds and midden representing a long
period of time.

304

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The first begins at the bridge, with a shell midden two or three
feet in thickness. I have failed to find a single piece of pottery at
this location and am of the opinion that it represents a pro-pottery
occupation. A few unidentified bones found there were in a rotten

condition.
A little to the north of Ash Lake is an old shell midden, with
some pottery known as Goose Creek Plain and Incised. This site
~s later than the on near the bridge, but earlier than one located
on the point of land shown protrudging out into Iajms Lake. This
point contains an artificial mound about six feet in height and
probably 60 x 100 feet, shaped somewhat like a fish, with the soil
from borrow pit removed in such manner as to form a moat. It
has been quite interesting to study the method of construction of
this mound, as there were baskets of clay carried to the site and
dumped into the fill, leaving the imprints of large leaves around
the individual loads. In some cases instead of leaf mold around
the clay, it was a thin layer of lime. I finally decided the clay
was being dug from a wet place and the leaves were used to line
their baskets, with the whole business thrown into the mound. At
first I could not account for the lime and thought it could have
been caused by feathers of some sort. I finally came to the conclusion that garpike skins were used, and when rotted would leave
a small amount of powdered lime around the clay. The reinforcing was rattan vines and these became silicitized and retained their
original shape.
Projectile points were fashioned from bone in a few instances,
but garpike scales were the usual type of point used, with some
kind of fish bone that may have been used. The only type of rock
material found at this site was a hoe and shovel fashioned from

FIGURE 19
Bay’town Area Sites.

News Notes and Editorials

305

sandstone, an occasional axe from the same material, and one
diamond shaped object, about 4" long, with one edge ground to a
point. This object was made from the same kind of sandstone and
could have been used to saw bones. This object was shaped like
knives found in Oklahoma but the edge was not sharp enough for
that purpose. I believe the hoe and shovel were used in constructing the mound. I was surprised that no artifacts fashioned from
hematite were found here, nor was there any burnt pieces showing
that it had been used in making a red pigment for warpaint or
decorating pottery. There is a type of red clay at the site which
leaves a very good wash on pottery and it may have been used for
paint as well. I did not find a single piece of flint of any kind.
There was evidence to show that clam and oyster shells were used
as scrapers, and some of the refuse found in such scrapers were
fishbones and small pieces of birdbones, probably wild pidgeons.
Pieces of tortoise and turtle shells were common, deer bones were
~lentiful
and there
was an bear
occasional
a larger animal,
aps a bison.
Sharpened
claws bone
were of
occasionally
found perand
were probably used for some purpose by the inhabitants. At the
top of the midden some glass was found showing that they had
come in contact with Europeans. An old oak tree at the site has
markings of a striking adder coming down the tree, and I have
been told this marking may have been put there by early Spanish
explorers, perhaps of the 16th century. The pottery type found
here is the same as that sent you last year.
At the Devil’s Elbow site there is an old midden which fails
to show any evidence of contact with European people. The pottery
and other artifacts are about the same as mentioned above, although
no agricultural implements have been found. Some of the pottery
decorations are much on the same order as that found in Louisiana
and known as Harrison Bayou.
Here comes the interesting part of this site. ~Professors and
students from the University of Houston have been here a number of times, a road has been cut through the center of upper part
of the mound, exposing large amounts of pottery, bones, shell, etc.,only a few months ago was it discovered that the entire midden
was located on the side of a large artificial mound, which may be
the largest in Texas. The mound is 688 feet in length, 360 feet in
width at the east end and somewhat less at the west end, The
maximum height before the road was cut through there was approximately 15 feet.
I kept finding traces of a type of pottery similar to Deasonville
11:111:14 but could not find the midden representing the people
who made this. Finally I decided to look for a Deasonville type of
mound, and then the problem was easily solved. I have dug into
the mound and found the pottery where it had been used with
other refuse in filling in a trench conf~aining cedar posts. These
were found at a level about six feet beneath the surface of the
mound prior to its disturbance by road construction workers. Beneath these post molds were a circular wall, which must have
been a village site prior to the construction of the mound. The
wall was circular Jn appearance, and probably constructed by
wattle and daub. The thickness was rather uniform, and all that
is left is a dark layer of soil about three inches in thickness, with
clay and sand on each side of it. I estimate that 56,000 yards of soil

306

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

was used in constructing this mound. I dug to a depth of 10~
feet at the east end of it, and this showed that it was constructed
by stages. I believe that there were originally two circular mounds,
and these were later joined together by a plaza.
A little farther up the Bayou there are a couple of pencil mark~.
The first represents a circular mound, perhaps 150 feet in diameter
and eight or ten feet in height. I have never made any kind of
excavation or borings at this site, nor have I observed any shells
or artifacts near there. I don’t believe Indians ever lived there
and it was undoubtedly used as a burial mound.
The only reason I have to state that it was an artificial mound
is the large quantity of sand found at the site. Normally the soil
near the top along the Bayou is a black gumbo. But in the construction of such mounds the natives dug soil from a site where it
was easy to get with their crude tools. Naturally sand was easy
to dig up and fill their baskets. Even today there is a distinct
di~erence from the type of topsoil found on these mounds from
that found on natural formations nearby. This makes it quite
easy to determine if a mound is a natural formation or was constructed by humans.
A part of the site is below sea level.
(See Figure 19.) It
can be found protruding from the banks of Cedar Bayou stream
when the wind is from the north and the tide quite low. About
five feet of topsoil covers the site. I think this represents a period
co-eval to the Tchefuncte period of Louisiana. A little distance
from the bank is evidence of a small mound, which may be a burial
location.
The place marked Lawrence Island is rich in cultural refuse,
human burials, etc. About 15 or 20 years ago the University of
Texas removed some skeletons from this site, but the owner of the
land objected to further explorations. An oil company is to drill
a well on the island, and it will be necessary to excavate a channel
through the march to carry material to the site. This is land representing a large amount of cultural refuse, and it has accumulated over a period of many centuries.
The site marked "McCullom Park" is interesting from the
standpoint of the amount of clam shells that have accumulated
there. It is located on the A. B. Lawrence property and Chambers
County road employees have been removing clam shells from a
large shell midden there. This site probably represents the terminus of the Bidai trail. Potsherds found there show a variety of
types, including one ~vhich I believe to be Tchefuncte Red Filmed.
The artifacts found there were turned over to Dr. R. A. Shearer,
at Mont Belvieu, Texas. I visited Dr. Shearer last Saturday and
he stated that they had given him about 100 pieces of pottery and
a number of bones taken from the site. He stated the workers
told him the pottery had come from all levels. The amount of
pottery found at this site is surprisingly small considering the
amount of material that has been hauled away. Shell in varying
depths is to be found over an area about 800 yards wide by three
miles in length. The lower level of the shell fails to show bones
of any kind but an occasional piece of pottery is found. I sent
what I found at the si~e to Dr. T. N. Campbell, and am sending
you all that I found on my last visit to the site. They are prob-

News Notes and Editorials

309

ably too small to be of any value, but you might want to look
them over and could possibly identify some of them. You may
retain them or throw a~vay if of no value.
I would like to see the State obtain some of this property along
the banks of Cedar Bayou and keep these mounds, middens and an
old corn-field as a State Park. Such locations that have not been
disturbed by farming are getting rather scarce."
THE MOUND LAKE SITE

A surface site was discovered by the Cart Austin family of
Brownfield, Texas, 14 miles northeast of Brownfield near Mound
Lake, an alkaline body of water known to the Spaniards as Lake
Umbilico because of its shape. Located on the Frank Roberts
Z-Ranch in Lynn County, the site covers some two acres of a
rising on the northwest side of the lake. There is no evidence of
house structures. The lake is surrounded by sandy fields such as
the one on which the site is located, so that frequent blowouts reveal new artifacts.
The artifacts collected by the Austins were donated to The
Museum, Texas Technological College, Lubbock, Texas, and the
following inventory made:

Flint

Artifacts:
265 projectile points
191 broken projectile points
65 snub-nosed scrapers
98 side scrapers
52 knives (only two complete)
6 gravers

Stone Artifacts:
1 hammerstone
1 mano
5 grinding stones

Shell Artifacts:
1 Glycemeris pendant.
5 broken pieces
The pottery collection consists of 386 sherds. The percentage
cannot be accurate in a surface site, but the sherds were so numerous at this site as to warrant mention.
Type
Percent.age
No.
Brownware-(El Paso, Jornada, Alma Plain, Polished) ...... 181
46.77
Chupadero Black-on-White ....................................... ll0
28.42
Corrugated ....................................................... 40
10.33
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta .......................... 20
5.17
Gila Polychrome ................................................... 17
4.39
Lincoln Black-on-Red .............................................. 12
3.10
Rio Grande Glaze I ................................. 3
.78
Unclassified ................................................... 3
.78
The similarities in pot sherds and the types of projectile points
lead us to conclude that the people who inhabited such sites as

310

Texas ArcheologicaI and Pa~eon$ological Society

Bonnell, near Ruidoso, New Mexico, or Bloom Mound, near Roswell, New Mexico, may have spent their summers on the plains in
search of meat for the winter. The Mound Lake Site is typical of
~many camp sites found in this area and doubtless has been used
for centuries as a hunting camp.
NOYCE JENNINGS,
Lubbock, Texas.
THE MORRIS SITE, CHEROKEE COUNTY, OKLAHOMA
Robert E. Bell and Richard H. Frazier have recently published
a twenty-page report entitled "Archaeological Discoveries at the
Morris Site, Cherokee County, Oklahoma" in the Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol. XXX, Number 2.
THE WHEELER SITE, DALLAS COUNTY, TEXAS
Wilson W. Crook, Jr. has published a paper, "The Wheeler
Site: a 3500-Year of Culture in Dallas County, Texas," in ~he
Fie/d and Laboratory, Voh XX, Number 2, April, 1952 (University
Press, Southern Methodist University, Dallas).

BOOK REVIEW
The Comanches, Lords of the South Plain&
E. Adamson Hoebel.
1952.

By Ernest Wallace and

University of Oklahoma Press, Norman,

Pp. 381, map, photographs, bibliography, index.

$5.00.

This book is number 34 in the Civilization of the American
Indian Series of the University of Oklahoma Press and attains the
same high level of attractive printing and authentic scholardhip of
previous volumes. The Comanches have always held a special
appeal for students of Southwestern history because these superb
horsemen, warriors, and buffalo hunters ranged over enormous
areas, sometimes hunting, sometimes raiding frontier settlements of
the Spanish and later the Americans, but always defending their
homelands against the advancing white man with unmatched
brav
ery-,,~ and shrewdness. Although most famous for their warfare, this tribe was also a powerful political factor in Southwestern
history for over 150 years, entering into successful trade relationships with the Spanish and American settlers, and various alliances
with both whites and other Indians. Only when they were outnumbered by 50 to one, decimated by war and smallpox, and
brought to the verge of starvation through the destruction of the
buffalo, did they finally surrender to life on a reservation in southwestern Oklahoma, in 1875. From a peak population of perhaps
20,000 in 1845, they were reduced to 1,171 in 1910. The number of
pure-bloods has continued to decrease, but there are now many
mixed-blood Comanches who still continue some of the ancient
customs.
Ernest Wallace is Professor of History at Texas Tech College
and has spent many years iu the study of Comanche history in
relation to the general history of the Southwest. Professor Hoebel
is chairman of the Department of Anthropology, University of
Utah, and is an outstanding authority on the legal codes, mores,
and other customs of the Comanches. Both authors are eminently
qualified to write the present book and have succeeded in producing a perfectly fascinating account, every page packed with information, and touching virtually every aspect of life of these
people. The professional anthropologist will find it the first general
source on the Comanches, weaving together information found in
scores of special papers. The historian will find much on the
movements, treaties, and wars of these people which affected the
course of history in New Mexico, Texas, and northern Mexico from
1705 to 1875 and even afterward. And, to those many persons who
simply wish to learn more about Indimu_s, it will prove an endless
source of interest; they can also expect to have many of their popular ideas about the Comanches uprooted.
It is difficult to choose any particular parts of the book for
special consideration in a review. Contrary to my well-known
habits, I could not find anything to criticize, and can only extend
my sincere recommendation to all to obtain a copy and read it
thoroughly. One thing did that strike me forcibly is that a way
should be found to encourage public-school teachers in Texas and
elsewhere to utilize such books in the teaching of history. While
we in the United States boast unceasingly of knowing and teaching the truth, the biased and false information given out on the

312

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

American Indians is hardly less than criminal. While quick to
praise any modern people for resisting aggression against their
nations, we pass off the Indians as unfortunate collections of cruel
and murderous savages who had to be exterminated as quickly
and thoroughly as possible. Wallace and Hoebel do not, to be sure,
even suggest that the Comanches are to be excused for many of
their raids for plunder, but they do manage to show with great
fairness that both sides had terrible problems of survival. The
white man was determined to take the Indians’ land and the Indian was just as determined to keep it. Treaties were made and
broken by both sides, but in the matter of sincerity the Indian was
clearly superior; both sides had men of integrity and honor who
were respected by the other. In a sense the wars of the Comanche
were one of the irrevocable conflicts of history: they had to happen.
The least we can expect in modern history courses is a balanced
treatment of events, causes, and blames. For this reason alone
The Comanches should receive wide reading.
The authors also present valuable data on one of the neglected
aspects of Comanche history, namely that the period of open warfare with Texans was preceded by a long period of relatively peaceful relations and trade. The Comanches established a flourishing
business of raiding Mexican settlements for horses, mules, and
occasionally children, which they sold or bartered to early American and German settlers in Texas. who were only too glad to get
them. But it was the greed for more and more land, and a
declaration of war against all Indians by the young State of Texas
which finally forced the Comanches into the most desperate
measures to retain at least part of their hunting grounds---and then
the white man proceeded to slaughter the great buffalo herds.
What could be expected of any people with pride and fighting
ability?
But history is only part of the present book. There are cha~.ters dealing with "Comancheria," the vast range of the tribe in its
several division, and its geographical features; on ’~ne People,"
a study of their physical appearance, language, family and band
organization," tribal" divisions" and territories,,,, and population figuries; on ’The Horse and the Buffalo, including a brief history
of the acquisition of horses by Plains Indians, the revolutions
brought about by the horse in their economic life, the great herds
owned by the Comanches, treatment of the animals and their
hunting techniques; on "Food, Clothing, and Dwellings"; "At Work
and at Play"; "From Cradle to Grave"; ’~ne Search for Power";
"Cosmogony and Folk Beliefs"; "Government and Law"; "Warfare"; "The Lords of the South Plains"; and "On the Reservation."
All of these subjects are written with consummate skill and
ample documentation. A particularly interesting addition is that
of photographs of several of the famed Comanche chiefs, and of
drawings made in the early 19th century.
ALEX KRIEGER,
University of Texas.

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER
OF THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Report for the twenty-fourth year from October 1, 1951
to August 31, 1952.

P~ECEIPTS
Balance on September 30, 1951

$ 1,228.85

1949 Dues, 1 @ $3
1950 Dues, 4 @ $3
1951 Dues, 128 @ $5 ......................................
1952 Dues, 12 @ $5 .............................................
Sale of.Bulletin% 34 @ $5 ...............................
Sale of Showcases to Texas Tech Museum .............
Reimbursement for reprints for Articles in Vol. 22_

3.00
12.00
640.00
60.00
170.00
700.00
171.50

TOTAL RECEIPTS ..............................$ 2,985.35
DISBURSEMENTS
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., printing 300
Copies of Vol. 22
.$
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., 1000 7½x10V2
envelopes ................................................
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., 1000 Statement Forms .....................................................
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., Society
Letterhead .......................................................
Southwestern Engraving Co., Dallas, for VoL 22 ....
Telephone Call at San Angelo Meeting to Abilene_
Postage: Mailing Bulletins @ 8c .............$13.58
Correspondence ................................... 10.55
Santa Fe Trail Transportation Company for
delivery of Vol. 22 ......................................

885.20
21.75
9.30
18.85
238.09
1.13
24.13
5.74

TOTAL DISBURSEMENTS ..............$ 1,204.19
Balance on deposit in the First National Bank,
Lubbock, Texas, on August 31, 1952
$ 1,781.16
ERNEST WALLACE,
Secretary-Treasurer.

MEMBERSHIP LIST 1951-52
HONORARY MEMBERSHIP

Albert G. Ingalls, Scientific American Magazine
................................................................. New York City, N. Y.
MEMBERS
A. & H. Society, Box 791 .................................... Roswell, N. M.
Abilene Printing & Stationery Company.................... Abilene, Texas
E. T. Adams .......................................................... Glen Rose, Texas
American Museum of Natuxal History ................ New York City, N. Y.
American Philosophical Society ........................ Philadelphia 6, Pa.
John R. Armstrong, Box 225 .......................................... Farwell, Texas
Ben D, Ashlock, Box 14 ............................................... Stanton, Texas
W. L. Atwood, 501 Ruth Street ........................................ Baytown, Texas
Dr. David Baerreis, Department of Soci. & Anthro.,
U. of Wis ........................................................................ Madison 6, Wis.
Baylor University Library ...................................................... Waco, Texas
Dr. Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma .................. Norman, Okla.
G. C. Benson, Box 381 ..................................................... Whitney, Texas
Joe Benton ......................................................................... Nocona, Texas
Kyrle Boldt, Rt. 1, Box 593 ............................................. Clayton 24, Mo.
W. P. Brennan ......................................................... Crystal City, Texas
J’o S. Bridwell, Bridwell Oil Co ......................... Wichita Falls, Texas
Harold D. Brighton, 941 Nebraska ........................... Norman, Okla.
Richmond L. Bronaugh, Baylor University. ................... Waco, Texas
Mrs. Charles Brower (Hall Ranch) ......... Richland Springs, Texas
D. E. Butchee, Route C ........................................................... Lamesa, Texas
George T. Butts, P. O. Box 2367 .................................. Norman, Okla.
C. M. Caldwell .................................................................... Abilcne, Texas
Mrs. Elizabeth W. Crozier Campbell, R. F. D ...... Carson City, Nev.
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, University of Texas ................... Austin, Texas
Sam Chamberlain ................................................................ Refugio, Texas
Chicago Natural History Museum, Roosevelt Road and
Lakeshore Drive ....................................................... Chicago 5, Ill.
Cleveland Public Library ...................................... Cleveland 14, Ohio
Columbia University Library ............................... New York City, N. Y.
John A. Corley, 208 S. 2nd Street ................................... Lamesa, Texas
Corpus Christi City l=~blic Library_ .............. Corpus Christi, Texas
Ben M. Cox ....................................................................... Eden, Texas
J. L. Cramer, 2488 Poly Drive ............................. BiIIings, Montana
Gus E. Cranz, 612 Meacham Bldg., Box 705 ........ Fort Worth 2, Texas
Co!. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road ............. San Antonio, Texas
Wilson W. Crook, Jr., 4130½ Hyer Street ............ Dallas, Texas
Dallas Public Library ........................................................... Dallas, Texas
E. C. de Montel, 1000 National Bldg ................Wichita Falls, Texas
Frederic H. Douglas, Denver Art Museum,
1300 Logan Street ............ Denver 3, Colo.
C. O. Drennan, 1504 Garner St ........................... Lamesa, Texas
James H. Durham, Box 1262 ............................... Roswell, N. M.
Dr. C. D. Eaves, Texas Technological College ...... Lubbock, Texas
E1 Paso Public Library ....................................... E1 Paso, Texas
Dr. :Merrill W. Everhart, 2704 Douglas Drive ....... San Angelo, Texas
W. S. Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick Drilling Co .... Corpus Christi, Texas
M. 1¢. Foote, 6110 Mimosa Lane ................. Dallas, Texas
R. E. Forrester, Jr ....................... Moran, Texas

Membership List 1951-52

315

W. S. Fulton................................ _Dragoon, Arizona
Art Gallaher, 440 Park Dr. ................ _Norman, Okla.
Harold S. Gladwin, 534 Valley Road_.......... Santa Barbara, Calif.
C. !L Gray, R. R. 5 .................................................. Burkburnett, Texas
Frank Grimes
....... Abilene, Texas
Mr. Billie Hanks, 727 Rust S+.......................... San Angelo, Texas
Hardin-Simmons University Library.................... Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Carolyn H. Harral, Cactus Hotel ............ San Angelo, Texas
R. K. Harris, 9024 San Fernando Way.................. Dallas 18, Texas
Ted Harris, 1901 Rosemont Dr ............. San Angelo, Texas
Dr. J. E. Hawkins, Baylor University....................... Waco, Texas
Dr. Frank C. Hibben, 3000 Campus Blvd ............. Albuquerque, N. M.
Dr. T. L. Hodges .............................................. Bismark, Ark.
Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological College .... Lubbock, Texas
Houston Public Library
Houston, Texas
N. R. Huggins, 109 Penrose St ........... San Angelo, Texas
Jack Hughes, 1618 Centervflle Rd .....-Dallas 18, Texas
Mrs. Charles B. Hunt, 635 Vine Street ................ Denver, Colo.
Illinois State Museum
_-Springfield, Ill.
A. T. Jackson, 508 E. 46th Street..................................... Austin, Texas
Henry James ........................................._Abilene, Texas
Edward B. Jelks, 3108 Wheeler Street-.................. Austin, Texas
Joint U~Jversity Libraries............................. Nashville 4, Tenm
Johns-Hopkins University Library........... Baltimore 18, Maryland
Mrs. Percy Jones, Box 176
............. Abilene, Texas
Mr. Joy Joyner, Oil Field Route .......................... Big Lake, Texas
Dr. J. Charles Kelley, University of Southern Ill ....... Carbondale, Ill.
Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, 911 S. Van Buren Ave ............. Dallas 8, Texas
Dr. Alex K.rieger, University of Texas ...................... Austin, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology.......................... Santa Fe, N. M.
C. E. Lacy, 402 West Creek
Lindsay, Okla.
John P. Lee ............................................................Tankersley, Texas
Judge Harry J. Lemley
.Hope, Ark.
Eli Lilly, 5807 Sunset Lane ...................................... Indianapolis, Ind.
Louisiana State University General Library........... Baton Rouge, Lm
Kenneth MacGowan, 1727 LeConte Ave ............. Los Angeles, Calif.
A. T. McDannald, Box 2972
_-.Houston, Texas
Allen J. McDaniel, Jr., 642 F_~ N. 16th Street .............. Abilene, Texas
McMurry College ......................................... Abilene, Texas
Metropolitan Museum of Art Library, Fifth Ave. and
82nd Street ......................................... _New York 28, N. Y.
Mrs. Glen E. Moore, 3610 Ft. Blvd .................... E1 Paso, Texas
Edward Moorman, 2002 Red River .......................... Austin, Texas
Dr. Louis S. Morgan, 3002 Sermett St ...................Wichita, Kansas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation,
Huntington Free Library ..................... New York City, N. Y.
Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place ........................ Chicago, Ill.
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and
42nd Streets ..................................... New York City, N. Y.
N’~rthwestern University Library........................... Evanston, Ill
Ohio University Library.
Athens, Ohio
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University........................... Cambridge, Masm
V,~. M. Pearce, Texas Technological College ...... Lubbock, Texas
Miss Reuel Pearson, 1138 W. Hildebrand ......... San Antonio, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept. of Americ~ Archaeology_-Amdover, Mass.

316

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Gertrude S. Phillips, 314 W. Main .............................. Norman,
H. C. Ragsdale, 315 Beauregard St ................... San Angelo,
L. E. Rawalt, 725 Post St .................................. Corpus Christi,
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 .............................................. ~Abilene,
J. Henry Ray, 2130 Fannin St ................................... Vernon,
Dr. Erik K. Reed, 238 Griffin St ............................... Santa Fe,
P. M. Rice ........................................................................._Hamilton,
Rice Institute Library ...............................................-Houston,
Dr. R. N. Richardson, Hardin-Simmons University._.Abilene,
Thomas E. Roberts ..............................................___Abilene,
James C. Roe, 900 Duggan Street .......................... San Angelo,
Rosenberg Library ..................................................... Galveston,
E. J. Ruhland, 6260 McComas ................................... Dallas 14,
San Antonio Public Library.............................. San Antonio,
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park ........ San Diego,

Okla.
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
N. M.
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas

Texas
Calif.

San Jacinto Museum of History Association ....... San Jacinto, Texas
E. B. Sayles, Arizona State Museum ................. Tucson, Arizona
Henry Sayles, Jr.......................................................... Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Karl Schmitt, Department of Anthro.,
University of Okla .................................................... Norman, Okla.
Dr. E. H. Sellards, Texas Memorial Museum ................ Austin, Texas
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University...... Dallas, Texas
Judge O. L. Sims ........................................................ Paint Rock, Texas
Dr. R. F. Smallwood, 518 Holly St ......................... Fayetteville, Ark.
Prof. Victor J. Smith, Sul Ross College .......................... Alpine, Texas
F. J. Soday, 1124 West Elm Street .......................... E1 Dorado, Ark

Southern Illinois University Library ............................... Carbondale, Ill.
Southern Methodist University Library ...................... Dallas, Texas
Southwest Museum Library, Highland Park 42....Los Angeles, Calif.
Southwest Texas Museum Association ......................Uvalde, Texas
Stephen F. Austin State Teachers College
Library ................................................................Nacogdoches, Texas
Charles R. Steen, 1013 Don Cubero ............................... Santa Fe, N. M.
R. L. Stephenson, P. O. Box 592 ............................. Ann Arbor, Mich.
Floyd V. Studer, 636 Amarillo Bldg ................... Amarillo, Texas
Walter W. Taylor, Jr., 711 Camino del Monte Sol... Santa Fe, N. M.
Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College
Library ................................................................. College Station, Texas

Texas State Library, Capitol Bldg................................. Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library.................... Lubbock, Texas
Texas Western College ..................................................... E1 Paso, Texas
Thomas Gilcrease Foundation ................................................... Tulsa, Okla.
Marvin E. Tong, 1935 E. Elm Street ........................... Springfield, Mo.
Tyrell Public Library ..................................................... Beaumont, Texas
University Museum Library, Univ. of Penn.,
33rd and Spruce ............................................... Philadelphia 4, Penn.
University of Arizona Library ................................... Tucson, Arizona
University of Arkansas Library. .............................. Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library .................................. Berkeley, Calif.
University of California at Los Angeles ............... Los Angeles, Calif.
University of Chicago Library ............................................ Chicago, Ill.
University of Colorado Libraries ................................... Boulder, Colo.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library ...................... Denver, Colo.
University of Illinois Library ............................................ Urbana. Ill,
University of Kansas Library......................................... Lawrence, Kans.
University of Michigan Library ........................... Ann Arbor, Michigan

Membership List 1951-52

317

University of Nebraska Library........................ Lincoln, Nebraska
University of New Mexico Library............._Albuquerque, N.
University of Oklahoma Library ................. Norman, Okla.
University of Texas Library........................ Austin, Texas
University of Utah Library.......... Salt Lake City 1, Utah
U. S. Department of Interior, Natl. Park Serv.
Region 3 Office, P. O. Box 1728 ...................... Santa Fe, N.
Bill Villines.
Rosedale, Okla.
Waco Public Library
....Waco, Texas
Dr. Ernest Wallace, Texas Technological College ........ Lubbock, Texas
P. H. Walser, 1102 N. 1st Street .......................... Temple, Texas
Washington State College Library .......................... Pullman, Wash.
Frank H. Watt, Box 1176 .............................................. Waco, Texas
Dr. Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons University ........ Abilene, Texas
William C. Watts, 2111 23rd Street ......................... Lubbock, Texas
Harry E. Weaver, R. R. Robert Lee ................... San Angelo, Texas
Dr. C. H. Webb, Children’s Clinic .................. Shreveport, La.
Joe Ben Wheat, University of Arizona
................ Tucson, Arizona
Dr. James N. White, 206 E. Harris ............... San Angelo, Texas
J. Eugene Williams, Box 1045 ...... Brady, Texas
Winkler County Free Library........................... Kermit, Texas
Wisconsin State Historical Society, 816 State
Street
.......... Madison 6, Wis.
A. H. Witte.................
Henrietta, Texas
Witte Museum .......................... San Antonio, Texas
R. B. Worthington, 4216 Walker Ave ...................... Houston, Texas
Bill Wright, 1226 Sylvan Drive .....................Abilene, Texas
Yale University Library .................................. New Haven, Conn.

TE
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
The Texas Archeological Society (TAS) offers a wide range of opportunities for
those interested in Texas heritage. The mission of the Society is to promote study,
preservation and awareness of Texas archeology. A recent strategic plan calls for the
Society to create training opportunities for students, enhance and expand programs,
increase and diversify membership, inform the community of their archeological heritage
and cultivate and preserve resources. The membership generally numbers around 1400.
The Society calendar begins in October with the Annual Meeting, an event that
has taken place since 1929. Archeologists, professional and avocational, get together to
share information in research sessions and to hear from nationally renowned luncheon and
banquet speakers. Friday is a popular evening for the public forum with high profile
speakers and artifact identification. Meetings will be held in Lubbock (08) and Del Rio (09).
Each spring TAS offers sessions of the Texas Archeology Academy. Topics in
this series of workshops include Archeology 101 (including a field day), Ceramics: The
Stories Pottery Tells, Lithics: Reading Stone Tools, Historic Archeology and Rock Art of
Texas. Each Academy features power point presentations° a manual and hands-on
activities to reinforce concepts presented. In 2009 sessions will be held in Georgetown,
Study Butte, and Lake Jackson. Surveys at the close of sessions reveal that participants
greatly value the information imparted during the workshop and the camaraderie of fellow
students.
The summer brings a field school that offers an opportunity for folks to
contribute to research about Texas archeology. The principal investigator is supported
by staff and experienced volunteers. Usually around 300 people participate. Newcomers
appreciate an orientation session before joining crews in the field.

Survey and lab

sessions provide other venues for people who want to learn more about the archeological
process.

The field school in 2009 will be in the Panhandle near Perryton.

We offer

scholarships to college students and Native Americans. A youth program instructs around
60 students each year.
Publications of the Society include a journal, the Bulletin of the TAS, a quarterly
newsletter and two web sites, v:~:~ ~cch or~ is the organizational web site that relates
current programs and opportunities. The other web site is

~¥~ ~b~L a

venue that offers information in the form of multi-level exhibits.

TAS has been a

supporting partner of Texas Beyond History since its inception.
For more information about TAS see ~ ~r~ or call 800 377-7240.

Facsimile Reprint
vvvvvv, g ustavMib vary.corn

