BULLETIN
OF THE

VOLUMES 21&22
1950-51

ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY

2009
~PRINT EDITION

BULLETIN
OF THE

~exa~ Ar~baeo~og~a~ a~
~aleou~olog~a! ~o~e~y
VOLUMES 21-22
1950-51

ARCHI~OLOGICAL
SOCII~TY
2009
~P~NT EDITION

Reprinted with permission of The Texas Archeological Society,
San Antonio, Texas by Gustav’s Library, Davenport, Iowa, 2009. This
reprint made from an original edition provided by The Texas

www.gustavslibrary.com
1011 E High St, Davenport, IA 52803

BULLETIN
OF THE

VOLUME TWENTY-ONE
1950

Published
by lhe
Socieflr at
Lubbock,
Texas

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PRINTED

IN THE UNITED

STATES OF AMERICA

BULLETIN
of the

TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:
Description and Analysis.
By Virginia Watson ...............................................................

7

The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma.
By Karl Schmitt ............................................................................ 69
Population Shifts in the Pre-Spanish Southwest.
By Erik K. Reed ......................................................................... 90
An Experiment in Relative Dating of
Archeological Remains by Stream Terraces.
By Jack T. Hughes ..................................................................... 97
News Notes and Editorials ..................................................... 105

6. Book Revie~vs ........................................................................... 112
7. Report of the Secretary-Treasurer..................................... 118
8. Membership List .......................................................................... 119

Vol. 21, 1950. Price $3.00
Lubbock, Texas

OFFICERS
VICTOR

J.

SMITH, Alpine, President

CYRUS N. RAY,

Abilene, President Emeritus

ALEX D. KRIEGER,

Austin, Active Vice-President

ERNEST WALLACE,

Lubbock, Secretary-Treasurer

W. C.

HOLDEN,

Lubbock, Editor o] Publications

DIRECTORS
In Addition to the Above
T. N. Campbell, Austin

Col. M. L. Crimmins, San Antonio

C. Boone McClure, Canyon

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
J. Charles Kelley, Austin

Floyd V. Studer, Amarillo

R. K. Harris, Dallas

F. H. Douglas, Denver, Colo.

Mrs. Glen E. Moore, E1 Paso

Otto O. Watts, Abilene
Rupert N. Richardson, Abilene

Erik K. Reed, Santa Fe

TRUSTEES
E. W. Shuler, Dallas

Robert E. Bell, Norman, Okla.

Frank Grimes, Abilene

O. L. Simms, Paint Rock

W. C. Watts, Lubbock

Mrs. Forest Kirkland, Dallas

Glen L. Evans, Austin

E. H. Sellards, Austin

orewor
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking; for the study of the
history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas;
for the encouragement of the proper
collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums and their
study and classification and the publication of the results of the researches
incident thereto.
The BULLETIN is published annually
for distribution to members of the society. Opinions expressed herein are
those of the writers, and do not nece.~sarily represent views of the society or
the editorial staff.

THE OPTIMA FOCUS OF THE PANHANDLE
ASPECT: DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
VIRGINIA

WATSON

In a recent publication, Alex Krieger, has focused considerable attention on what is known of the prehistory of the
Texas Panhandle. The present paper is supplementary to
the forementioned work as it will deal with a related
archaeological manifestation in the Oklahoma Panhandle as
known through excavations carried on at the Stamper2 site.
Three things will be attempted herein: (1) a description
of theStamper site; (2) a comparison of this site with some
other archaeological manifestations with which it is related;
and (3) a discussion of its temporal and spatial location in
American prehistory.
The site in question has been mentioned in the literature~
but no complete discussion has appeared. Excavation of the
site, which is located two and one-half miles south of the
town of Optima on the south bank of the North Canadian
River in Texas County, Oklahoma, was undertaken in 1933
and 1934. The project was a cooperative undertaking by
the Department of Anthropology of the University of Oklahoma and the F. E. R. A., under the general direction of
Forrest E. Clements. The late C. Stuart Johnston, then a
graduate student at the University of Oklahoma, supervised
the major part of the excavations; and the present report
is based almost entirely on his field notes and the materials
which he excavated4. Johnston worked at the site in the
1.

l~rieger, 1946.

:L The destguatiou of this site employed in the University of Oklahoma
survey is TxSt I. It includes: county symbol, site landowner symbol, and
number of the particular site on that land. Thus: Tx--Texas County;
Stamper; I--first site, In this paper the name of the landowner, Stamper,
xvill be used to facilitate matters.
3.
Johnston, 19.39; Clements, ]945; Griffin. 1946; Krieger, 1946, 1947; "iVede!,
]947.

4. All of the original notebooks but one are in the files of the Department
of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, as well as a typewritten copy
of the missing field notebook. Unfortunately, however, the diagrams from
the original notebook were not copied in the typescript and the very serious
lacunae this makes in our dat~ will be particularly apparent in the discussion
of stratigral)hy and architecture.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

summers of 1933 and 1934. In December of 1934 a small
portion of the site was excavated under the supervision of
Fred Carder Jr.~
Ambient
The three counties which constitute the Oklahoma Panhandle lie in the Great Plains physiographic province. The
area in general is a featureless plain drained by the Cimarron
and North Canadian Rivers and their tributaries. The chief
stream of Texas County is the North Canadian River (also
known as Beaver Creek) which flows in an easterly direction across the central part of the county. "The stream
contains water throughout the year but exhibits the great
variability common to streams of semi-arid regions. During dry periods the stream may dwindle until it is represented by a succession of shallow pools connected by the
merest threads of water. During periods of more abundant
rainfall, the stream may fill its channel from bank to bank,
covering in some instances, a distance of several hundred
yards.’’~ Large amounts of sand are deposited on the flood
plain of the North Canadian at certain times of the year,
and because of the prevailing southwesterly winds much
of this material is later transported to the north side. of
the river where sand dunes are formed. According to
Gould and Lonsdale, the valley bottom on the south side
o~ the river contains silt-like materials which are excellent for agricultural purposes while the north side of the
valley is usually less fertile.~ During certain periods of the
5.
It might be said the present project is in the nature of s. salvage prG
gram. Johnston’s notes had been on file at the University of Oklahoma since
the time of the excavations, with no attempt, so far as the writer is aware,
at a complete analysis. A small portion of the material had been catalogued
by D. A. Baerreis in 1940.
In 1946, twelve years after excavations were
closed at the site, the remainder of the material was catalogued by D. J.
Wenner, Jr., and in 1947 the writer undertook to analyze the whole.
It has
not been an easy task and many questions will remain unanswered,
It was
felt, however, that in spite of the number of problems remaining, the addition to existing knowledge would be sufficient to warrant at least summary
publication of the material in the form of the present paper.
Grateful
ack~lowledgment is d~e the following individuals of the University of Oklahoma: ]Robert E. Bell, for a critical reading of the manuscript; J. Willis
Stovall,l for first reporting the site and for assistance in bone identification; and Ralph B. Shead. for the drawings which accompany this paper.
Gould and Lonsdale, 1926, p. 9.
7.

Ibid., p. 11.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

year uncultivated portions of the valley bottom are richly
covered with grass; and a few trees, such as cottonwoods
and willows, also are included in valley bottom flora. Yucca
and sage are typical flora in non-valley lands.
At the present time, the climatic conditions in Texas
County are "typical of the greater part of the High Plains
region. During the summer months maximum temperatures of above 100 degrees Fahrenheit are experienced, but
because of relatively high altitude and low humidity the
nights are usually cool, and the heat of the days not excessively oppressive .... the maximum temperature for winter months is about 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Killing frosts
in the area may be expected fairly late in the spring and
fairly early in the fall. The average growing season is 199
days. The average rainfall is 20.30 inches, 23% of which
falls during the growing season.’’e
The geological details of the area need not concern us
here with the exception of one formation, caliche, an impure limestone which varies in color from pure, chalky
white to buff or gray. This material was used in dwelling
construction at the Stamper site. "Overlying the Tertiary
deposits and widely distributed throughout this portion of
the Great Plains [Texas County] are caliche deposits. This
caliche varies from one to twenty feet in thickness and
occasionally one observes two or more accumulations, one
above the other. It is the same as the ’cap rock’ of the Texas
Panhandle .... -9
The Stamper site itself is situated on the first terrace of the North Canadian River.,o The site overlooks the
river valley which is about one mile wide at that point. The
first terrace, roughly fifteen feet above the valley floor, is
approximately two hundred to three hundred yards wide.
S.

~bid., p. ]0.

9.

Six, 1930, p. 18.

Johnston reported nine other sites within a five-mile radius of
10.
Stamper, which he indicated, in general, as being similar to it.
Scanty surface material from three of these sites, examined by the writer, hears this
out. Although the majority of these sites appeared to be composed of single
ur~it dwellings as is Stamper, one of them was reported as a multiple unit
dwelling, composed of several rooms.

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The second terrace is less distinct than the first and is backed
by a series of low hills. Several continuous flowing springs
at the foot of the first terrace, the clear view of the surrounding country, ~and the fertile soil of the river valley,
combine to make the location a strategic one.
Approximately one-half mile southeast of the village is
a large outcrop of caliche which bears evidence of quarrying; very likely the caliche slabs used in some of the rooms
at Stamper were obtained from this place.
The next
closest caliche quarry is about two miles from the village.
Before excavation was begun the surface of the site was
covered with numerous low ridges and knolls which later
proved to be remains of rooms. The soil in between each
had been eroded somewhat while the soil in the rooms remained to form the hummoCks. Eighteen rooms and anterooms were indicated by the tops of caliche slabs which
protruded above the level of the ground. Plate 1, A, gives
some idea of the physiographic setting of the site with a
corner of the site in the foreground and in the background
the view, looking north, out into the valley:
Techniques o] Excavation
The caliche slabs protruding from the ground at the
Stamper site may have suggested the excavation procedure
for the first season. Room interiors (all of 1, one-half of 2
and most of 3) were first cleared of top soil and then excavated to the level of the first floor. Details of techniques
are not mentioned, but in general surface soil was first removed, and then the dirt down to the floor was taken out
with a trowel and screened. In all rooms the artifacts which
came from the floor level were kept separate from those in
the fill. Positions of features and artifacts on the floors of
room 1 and room 2 were recorded in terms of the distance
from the house walls; room 3 was divided into one-foot
squares and the materials located in these squares. The
horizontal position of fill materials was usually recorded
in terms of distance from the wall and vertical position in
terms of depth from surface.

The Optima Focus of the P~nhandle Aspect:

11

In 1934 initial digging consisted of the excavation of two
trenches, one at right angles to the other.

Stratigraphy was

noted and thickness of various levels (sterile and artifact
bearing)

was recorded.

Surface depth only was noted.

Four other smaller trenches were also excavated.
Excavation inside of the rooms in 1934 was basically
similar to that of the preceding year with the principal exception that plural floors were sought and often found.
Rooms 2 and 3 were completed and in addition, 4, 5, 6, and
7 were excavated.
Stratigraphy
Excavations at the Stamper site indicate occupation (s) by
a culturally homogeneous population. Where it has been
possible to check, there is no change in material
from level to level or from one floor to another in the same
room, and in the notes Johnston mentions this fact several
times. The same types of artifacts were found from top
to bottom; apparently percentages from one level to another varied insignificantly when at all.
Multiple floor levels existed in several rooms. In some
cases, there has been found an abundance of charcoal, charred wood, and burned clay, suggesting that the room
burned and that soon afterwards a new structure was
erected on the same spot with perhaps a layer of earth
spread over the old floor. In other cases inter-floor soil
may represent temporary abandonment of the room site
with re-occupation at a later date. In connection with
several rooms, notably 3, there is indication that test
trenches outside of the room produced stratigraphic sections which corresponded to those within the room. In other
words, sterile and artifact bearing layers and soil types corresponded in depth and thickness. This would seem to
indicate that there was temporary simultaneous abandonment of both the room and surrounding territory of that
particular section of the village (or possibly the whole
village).

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

12

Subsistence
Evidences for both agriculture and hunting as means of
subsistence were found at the Stamper site.

Both inside

and outside of the various rooms charred corn cobs and
charred corn grains were found in abundance, with at least
one excavated cob still containing corn grains.
tend

to

be

rather

small,

the

fragmentary

The cobs
specimens

measured by the writer averaging 3A,, in diameter and 1~" in
length. Charred corn stalks were also found in the central
firepit of room 3.

No actual evidence of other plants such

as beans and squash was ~ound.
Animal bones were numerous, and several types were
found.

The food animals, in order of abundance of bones,

are: bison, antelope, deer, jack rabbit, cotton tail rabbit,
turtle, ground hog, prairie dog, duck and peccary.

There

were no evidences of fish remains. Mussel shells were present in such small numbers that it is unlikely they represent a very important source of food, if indeed, they were
used for alimentary purposes at all.
Available evidence suggests a fairly even balance between hunting and agriculture so far as their importance
in the subsistence economy is concerned.

One hundred and

ten projectile points were excavated in contrast to only 5
bison scapula hoes and 19 bison tibia digging tools. When
we take into consideration such factors as (1) ease of
manufacture of the two classes of artifacts--hunting and
farming, (2) the considerably higher loss of projectile points
through use than implements in the same manner, and (3)
the necessity of several projectile points per hunter as
opposed to one digging stick or hoe per one or more farmers,
the preponderance of projectile points over agricultura! implements does not seem excessive or indicative of the predominance of hunting over agriculture as might at first
glance seem to be the case.

The Optima Focus o$ the Panhandle Aspect:

13

Architecture and Associated Features12
In general the Structures at the Stamper site are single
unit dwellings as opposed to the compound dwellings of
several related sites in the Texas Panhandle. That is, each
unit, herein called a room or house, is completely separated
spatially from all other such units. Room size varies, with
six of the seven units ranging from eight by ten feet to sixteen by twenty-one feet. Room 2, measuring 32 feet by
38 feet, is considerably larger than the others and differs
further in containing several sub-floor burials and relatively
few artifacts, as well as in the type of wall-base construction.~3 The rooms are rectangular to squhre in shape, and
both square and rounded corners are present. Adjacent to
rooms 1, 2, 3, and 5 are anterooms, usually small, which will
be referred to as such or by the number of the room to
which they are joined plus a letter. Thus room 3a is the
anteroom at the northwest corner of room 3; room 3b the
anteroom at the northeast corner of room 3; 2a the anteroom to the west of room 2;~4 and 5a the anteroom to the
south of room 5.
Wall bases. Two main kinds of wall base materials were
used at Stamper, caliche slabs and adobe. By far the most
common type of stone wall remains consists of. irregularly
shaped slabs of caliche placed on end and edge to edge,
forming but a single row on each of the four sides of the
room. These blocks average 5 inches in thickness, one and a
half feet in width and thirty inches in height, and are set in
a shallow trench. The spaces between the slabs were sometimes filled with a mixture of dirt and pieces of caliche,
sometimes with adobe. In some cases too, the slabs were

12, The description of architecture and associated features ts ba~ed prio
marily upon excavations of Rooms lqos. 1, 2, 2ao 3 and their anterooms, because the notes are most complete for these units. Data from Rooms
4: $, 6, and ? are used when they are available. Rooms Nos. 9, 10, 110 and
12 were excavated later Out no notes from this work have been incorporated
herein.
18. Dimensions of the rooms are as follows: No. 1, 8’x10’; No. 2, 82’x,~8";
No. 3, 16’x21’; /~o. 4, 4’-9"x14’-9" (?); :No. 5, 6’-4"x17’-3"; ~qo. 6, ?’-6"x14’-4"’;
No. 7, 9’-9"x19’.
14. Although the exact dimensions of No. 2a are not available, it is
rectangular in shape and indications are that it was considerably larger
than the other anterooms and, as will be discussed later, probably a room
in its own right.

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

reinforced near the base on the ontside with adobe, giving
a thickness of ten to fifteen inches.

All or the majority

of the wall bases of rooms 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 are of this
type. A view of room 3 is shown in Plate 1, B.
The north, south, and east wall bases of room 2 (the largest structure) have two parallel rows of slabs with similar
orientation.

These bases average 14 inches in thickness,

the space between the two rows of slabs being filled either
with dirt alone or dirt mixed with caliche fragments, this
latter mixture often being exceedingly hard.

There is no

indication that this type of wall base was ever reinforced
at the bottom with adobe.

The fact that this kind of base

is found only in room 2 suggests that perhaps there was
some connection between the size of the structure and the
need for more substantial walls.
Small sections of the wall bases of several rooms and the
greater part of the bases of three anterooms have no stone
in their construction. Its place is taken by adobe, either in
block form or solid masses. The west wall base of room 2,
the wall bases of 2a, and all but the south base of 3b are
made of solid adobe. No adobe blocks or stone were used.
The adobe was covered with a layer of clay plaster, from
one-fourth to one-half inches in thickness, which was apparently mixed with grass and then applied by hand,
fingerprints still being apparent. The plaster curved to the
floor and the corners of the wall base were rounded.
The wall bases of 3a and the south base of 3b are made
of rectangular adobe blocks. There is some variation in the
size of the bricks, some measuring approximately eight by
ten by twelve inches, others approximately eight by six by
twenty inches. Light yellow in color, the blocks were set

Io

PLATE 1
Stamper site before excf~va, tion, looking north ",with site in foreground

and Canadian River Valley in baokgrozlnd.
IL iqoom 3 after excavation to first floor level.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspec$:

17

in a dark grey clay matrix (about three to four inches
apart), the dark clay covering them on all faces.

There is

no mention of more than one course of these blocks having
been found.

Although Johnston’s notes give tantalizing

suggestions of relative periods of use of wall base types,
the exact relationships are not clear and we must await further excavations for detailed data on the point.
Walls proper.

Taking into consideration the evidence

both positive and negative, which there is for the wall
structure at Stamper, what seems to be the most probable
architectural type?

From the negative side of the question

let it be stated that it seems unlikely that the wall type
characteristics of the Antelope Creek Focus sites in the
Texas Panhandle, i. e. caliche slabs set horizontally in mortar, could have been characteristic of any of the Stamper
rooms with the possible exception of room 2.
least three reasons for this belief.

There are at

In the first place, there

is a general absence at the site of horizontally oriented
slabs superimposed on the vertically placed basal slabs.
Actually, there was one specific section of wall (excluding
room 2) where this condition existed, but evidently the horizontally placed slabs did not reach any great height. Secondly, there is a general absence of caliche slabs either just
inside or outside of the rooms. One would expect to find
a considerable number of them had they been used in wall
construction. To be sure, some caliche slabs were found
in the fill, but in very small numbers. In the third place,
would it not be architecturally impossible to erect this
type of room wall on a single row of end set slabs, some
of which were but five inches in thickness?
From the evidence at hand, what type of wall is indicated
for the majority of rooms. Although detailed data on post
holes are lacking, it is mentioned that in most of the rooms
post holes are "numerous and arranged in rows." The locations of these rows are not given but that they may have

18

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontologica~ Society

been located at the room edges is not impossible.’7 Again,
although the notes are not clear, there is evidence that
four center posts were used. The general use of four center posts in room construction can be inferred, albeit timidly. This being the case, a wall of pole supports covered
with some type of material seems likely. Thatch, skins,
and clay are three possibilities which immediately come to
mind. The first two materials may have been used although
there is no proof of it in the archaeological record. The
third material, mud plaster, is most likely, as numerous
fragments of hard clay, both charred and uncharred, and
bearing pole imprints have been found. The pole imprints
in the specimens examined by the writer average one and
one-half inches in diameter. Admitting that the data are
not complete the wall type characteristic, or most common
at the Stamper site, seems to have consisted of a framework
of small poles set at the edges of the rooms and covered with
mud plaster. Around (?) the base of the wall were set
a single row of caliche slabs. Probably four centrally
located posts, somewhat larger in diameter than the wall
posts, served as a supporting grid for the framework. It
is likely, on purely structural grounds, that the walls sloped
in at the top forming also the "roof".
A possible exception to a pole-mud type of wall construction is room 2. It will be remembered that this is considerably larger than the other rooms and that the bases of
the north, south, and east walls consist of a double row of
17. The question of just how the wail poles were set in relation to the
caliche slabs cannot be answered definitely at this time. The exact location

of the "numerous rows" of post holes is not mentioned in the notes. There
are at least three possibilities, of course, l~irst, that the poles could have
been set outside of the slabs. This seems unlikely bece~use: a) many of
the slabs are reinforced on the outside with adobe and no mention is made
of pole imprints in the latter; and b) in the Norman photograph the situation is not pictured that way. Secondly, that the poles were set Into the
matrix between the caliche slabs, in other words, anchored in the foundation. The main argument against this placement of poles in the bases at
Sta.mper is the fact that because of the single-slab-base construction it
"would probably be hnpossible to accommodate numerous small poles in said
base--only a few being admissible between the slabs.
The third possibility, that the poles were placed inside of the slab row
seems most likely at the present time although the evidence is scanty.
Although there is probably little avail in trying to suggest reasons for this,
s. plausible one comes to mind. The slabs might not only have served as a
reinforcement for the wall poles but they might also have a~fforded some
protection from water during the heavy rains to which, no doubt, the area
wss subjected periodically.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

19

caliche slabs, the space between them having been filled
with dirt and caliche fragments.

This base construction is

strikingly similar to that found in most of the rooms which
have been described from Antelope Creek Focus sites and
structurally could serve as the base for caliche slabs placed
horizontally in an adobe matrix. In fact, in a section of
room 2 ca]iche slabs were found placed horizontally above
the base slabs; to what height, whether in a matrix of
adobe, or how many courses were laid, is not known.
Serai-subterranean? The question of whether or not the
rooms are semi-subterranean cannot be conclusively answered at this time, although it seems unlikely that most
room floors were much, if any, distance below the surrounding land. The base slabs in wall construction were
usually set in a shallow trench, but there is no direct
indication that pits were dug prior to making the wall
trenches, although as suggested it is very probable that the
floor level of the rooms, in a few cases, was slightly below
the level of the earth outside.
Two further considerations suggest that the rooms were
built on the earth’s surface or only very slightly below it.
The entryways do not slope as they most certainly would
in a semi-subterranean structure in which there is no vertical approach at the outside end. Secondly, it must be remembered that many of the base slabs used in wall construction were reinforced on the outside (italics mine) with
clay, sometimes to a thickness of 10 inches. Would this not
be superfluous, if not impossible in a semi-subterranean
structure?
Floors.
The floors in general consist of a rather hard
layer of yellow sandy clay which is relatively level and
smooth. At least several of the rooms have plural floors
which may be separated one from the other by from one
to six inches. The floor levels within the rooms, according
to the notes, correspond to occupation levels of the area
surrounding them. For example, the three floor levels in
room 3 correspond with levels which were found in sev-

2O

Texas Archeolo~cal and Paleontological Society

eral trenches dug outside of that room.

It might be noted

here that cultural material found on the different floor
levels is basically the same.
One interesting feature in room 2 is suggestive of the
"altar" found in some of the rooms of the Antelope Creek
Focus.of the Texas Panhandle.’8 In this room (the largest
of all) along the west wall, opposite the entrance, is a raised
platform of hard yellow earth. It is six feet long, and seven
feet wide, and protrudes above the surrounding floor level.
There are fire pits about it. This platform is considerably
lower than those in Texas, but its location in the house is
similar.
Whereas in the Antelope Creek Focus rooms a depression
of the floor usually extends from the "altar" to the entrance,
there is no evidence of this in room 2 at Stamper. However,
in 2a, which adjoins room 2 on the west (just back of the
"altar") there was a depression evidently similar in form to
those in Texas. The depression runs the full east-west
length of the room. It is 40 inches wide and 10 inches deep
and appears to have been plastered. Its rims are raised above
floor level.
Johnston, although he calls this feature a fire pit, makes
no mention of ash or other contents. In view of this fact,
the unusual shape of the depression, plus its similarity to
depressions in certain Antelope Creek Focus rooms which
are not firepits, it seems best to reserve final judgement on
its use until further excavations which might shed light
on the problem, are made.
It is, of course, possible that the "altar" and depression
were structurally related as they seem to be in Antelope
Creek Focus rooms. Disregarding for the moment that they
seem to have been located in adjacent rooms, it may be
pointed out that although we do not know from the notes if
the depression and altar were in line with one another, it
is very probable that they were; and in any case, it is
]8,

l~:rieger.

194(~. p. 33.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

21

evident from the relative size and position of room 2 and
2a that they could not have been greatly separated axially.
If the two were related it is interesting to note that the depression at Stamper is to the west of the altar whereas in
Antelope Creek Focus rooms it is (always) to the east. It
is not at all unlikely that in the case of rooms 2 and 2a we
have a stratigraphic problem in which successive groups
of occupants may* have engaged, not only in re-use of
previously built structures, but also in rebuilding and remodeling of same. In other words, at one time the depression and altar may have been parts of the same structure,
with a wall later being put in front of the altar to form a
new room, thus separating the depression from it. This
seems quite possible as Johnston ren~larks that the depression continues under the west wall of room 2.
Pits. Firepits are present both inside and outside of the
rooms.,9 In rooms 1, 2, and 3 the larger of the firepits tend
to be centrally located, while the smaller ones are at various other places, often fairly near the house corners. With
the exception of one, the pits are basin shaped and there is
no indication that any of these was clay lined. One pit,
with vertical instead of sloping sides had a clay lining, and
in two of the firepits the rims were raised above the surrounding floor level. There were no stone lined firepits.
Also for the rooms, other pits, evidently not used for fire,
are mentioned. These tend to be somewhat smaller-than
firepits although in shape they are similar. Some of them
contain cultural material. No other details are known.
Outside of the rooms, pits were found, possibly used for
storage, but no detailed description is available. Apparently
no bel!-shaped cists or caches were encountered at the site.
19.

Firepit dime~siol~s (3 rooms) are as follows:
Room
Depth
Diameter
1
2
2
2
2
3
a
;;

14"
5"
5"
6"

12" inside; 22" outside
2]"
(raised rim)
?
25’o

8"

28"

12"
4"
4’"

30"
14½"
~ 7°°

(cla),

lined)

22

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

Just north of room 3 were two irregularly shaped pits
of yellowish, sandy clay which contrasted with the dark
grey, more compact earth around them.

In each of these

there were several smaller holes which contained no artifacts with the exception of the hole nearest the northeast
corner of room 3 which contained "a number of scrapers
and knives."

The two pits themselves were excavated, one

to a depth of 13 inches and the other to a depth of 27 inches,
at which depths undisturbed earth was encountered.
In
the first pit a fragment of stone pipe and several bone and
pottery fragments were found.
All the pottery was
Stamper cordmarked. In the second pit numerous large
buffalo bones (mostly leg and scapula) were found.

From

the photographs these pits seem to be fairly straight sided
with a tendency to a flat bottom.

To what use they may

have been put is conjectural. It is conceivable that they
were used for storage (note bison leg and scapula bone, commonly used as implements, in one), or, as Johnston has
suggested, they may have been dug for building material
and later filled in by natural agencies (note use of yellow
clay in house floors and adobe in walls).

Posthole pattern.
Unfortunately very little is known
about posthole patterns as the diagrams on which they
were pictured are missing and nowhere in the verbal
notes is their arrangement specifically mentioned. Postholes are absent in the anterooms but "in the larger buildings they are numerous and arranged in rows."
Tunnels. At least rooms 1, 2, and 6 each had a "tunnel"
extending to the east (or south?). Evidence for these consist of two parallel rows of vertically placed slabs extending
from each room. In rooms 1 and 2 the south row of slabs
is shorter than the north row, and in room 1 the east end
was blocked by several slabs, suggesting either that the opening was on the south side of the passage or these slabs
served as means for closing the opening. The floor level
of the "tunnel" in each case was the same as that in the
room. In room 2 a double row of slabs (evidently a continuation of the room walls) extended across the tunnel at

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

the base (back).

23

These slabs were one and one-half feet

lower than the slabs of the room wall proper, which they
joined.

No such tunnels are mentioned for the other rooms,

and it is
room 3.~o

explicitly

stated

that

none

was

found

in

Orientation of the tunnel in room 6 is not certain. On a
small map in the notes it is facing west, but elsewhere
Johnston makes the statement that the tunnels never face
west, only east and south. Tunnels for rooms I and 2 face
east, so perhaps room 6 is the southerly tunnel. This point
must remain obscure.
Whether the tunnels served as entryways or ventilators
is a moot question. There is some opinion that the latter
function was the correct one, at least in Antelope Creek
Focus houses.~ However, in the Stamper rooms there are
reasons to believe that the tunnel may have been used as an
entrance. In the first place, there is an architectural consideration: namely that with ’a pole and adobe wall structure it would be impractical if not impossible to have a roof
entryway. Furthermore, with the base construction of the
tunnels being identical in form to that of room walls proper
it is not difficult to suppose that a certain amount of height
could be attained in the tunnel ~or human thoroughfare.
Whether entrance would have been made in an erect,
stooped, or creeping position is not known. Although the
two tunnels for which we have measurements are narrow
(seventeen inches and two feet) it would not be humanly
impossible to move through them.
Anterooms. Adjoining several of the rooms were small
"anterooms" which were circular with the exception of one
that was rectangular. Usually measuring six to seven feet
in diameter, the anterooms were located along the west, east,
or south wall of a room. Rooms 1 and 5 had one anteroom
20.

21.

:[)imensions of three tunnels are as follows:
Roon~ 1: North wall, 3’; south wal! lacking; w’tdth. 2’.
Room 2: North wall. 6’; south wall, 3’; width, ?.
Room 6: Both walls are 2" long; tunnel Is 17" wide.
Krieger, 1946. p. 34.

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

adjoining them; two anterooms adjoined room 3. As has
been mentioned both caliche slabs and adobe were used in
anteroom wall construction. In anterooms 3a and 3b the
depth corresponded to that in the adjoining room. In la and
5a(?) the anterooms were deeper than the room floor.
Excavations brought to light no evidence of a connecting
door between room and anteroom, although it is not impossible, of course, that there may have been one above
the base slabs or adobe. As a matter of fact there were no
~ndications whatsoever of breaks which might have been
used for entryways in the anteroom wall bases.
Presumably the anterooms were used contemporaneously
with the rooms they adjoined. Possible exceptions to this
statement are 3a and 3b which may have originally been
built at some time prior to the building of room 3. A one
inch thick layer of ash and soil underlay the walls of room
3 and a considerable area around it. At least one wall
(maybe more or all, but this is not clear) of 3a was not
underlain by the ash bed; so presumably it was built at a
time prior to room 3. Also in the same room a section of the
east wall was built against the adobe wall in 3b and extended
over it suggesting again that at least one wall of the anteroom had been constructed prior to the time when room 3
was built. There are no indications mentioned as to the
degree of antecedence of 3a and 3b over No. 3o That is,
were they sections of older rooms re-used, were anterooms
regularly built before the rooms, or was something else
indicated?
Several possible uses to which these anterooms may have
been put come to mind. One thinks first of a pantry-like
storage room. The possibility that they may have been used
PLATE 2

I. Artifacts of bone and antler from Stamper site. A-B, bison scapula
hoes; C-]D, bison metapodial digging sticks; E-F, "spatulate" objects;
awls, deer ulna, proximal end removed; J-K, awls, deer ulna, distal end
removed L-R, awls of bone splinter; ~£-P, bone "awls" rectangular in cross
section; Q, fragmentary "awl" of bison rib; S-T, "’rasps" of bison rib
notched bone; ~, bird bone awl; W and Y, antler tapping tools (?).
II. Artifacts of pottery and shell. A-K, rim sherds; L-M clay spindle
whorls; IN[, O||vella shells; O-P, mvssel shell pendants; Q-R, ~otnted mussel
shells.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

27

either for sleeping or as work rooms should likewise not be
overlooked.
Burials
Within the rooms the skeletal remains of seven individuals,
two adults and five children, (none of which has been examined by the writer) were found, all of them in subfloor
pits. Of these, five were in room 2, one in room 1, and one in
room 5. In addition, the skeleton of an adult male was reported to have been taken from la before the University of
Oklahoma personnel initiated excavation. Three of the
burials were flexed, the positions of the others not being
mentioned. In five cases the head was oriented to the east
Grave goods were rare, consisting only of one elbow pipe,
seven mussel shells and several (number?) shell beads.
There is no indication that the burial pits were lined with
either clay or stone. No burials are reported from outside
of the houses.
Sub-floor burials are, of course, not uncommon in Panhandle Aspect sites. It is interesting to note, however, that
data from several sites indicate a tendency to concentrate
sub-floor burials in but one structure of the site. At the
Stamper site five burials were made in room 2, but one
each in other rooms; at Alibates22 all were in one room; at
Antelope Creek23 all but one were in a single room; no
burials are as yet reported from Ruin 55. The occurrence
of the burials at Antelope Creek in a single large room is
interesting in view of the fact that at Stamper, room 2 is
considerably larger than the other rooms.
Although the relatively few burials found at the various
sites can by no means constitute the total dead of the respective communities during their period (s) of occupancy,
the occurrence of the majority of those found at three different sites in a single room may prove to be of significance
in a number of ways. These burials may be representative

22.

I~Iobbs, 1941, p. 125.

2,3.

Johnston, 1939, D. 198.

28

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

of a particular time period in the occupation span--the
burials from other periods being made elsewhere. A further possible interpretation would be that the burials in a
single structure might be representative of a selected number of individuals over a longer period of time.
Artifacts~
Agricultural implements. Five hoes made of bison scapulae (Plate 2, I, A and B) were found at the site. All are in
fragmentary condition with the proximal end wholly or partially missing so that hafting details, if any, are unknown.
One fragmentary ~leer scapula may also have been used as
a hoe although there is no certainty of this.
Digging tools (Plate 2, I, C and D) of bison tibia were
common, 17 specimens having been catalogued although only
eight were examined by the writer. The proximal end of
the bones was removed, and the distal end was very likely
either used for a handle, or, as in most cases, perforated,
probably for hafting. One was found which contained a
piece of wood still in place in the bone. The six complete (or nearly so) digging tools examined by the writer
varied from five and one-fourth to nine and three-fourths
inches in length. The anterior part of the bone had been
removed. The sides and bottom were smoothed and in
many cases had a polish, which may have resulted from use.
Two other artifacts are probably unfinished bison tibia
digging tools. They are twelve and one-half and fourteen
inches in length. In both cases the proximal end of the
tibia has been removed; the distal end is not perforated;
the anterior portion of the bone has been removed but the
edges and end are not yet smoothd, and give the appearance
of successive gougings.
Grinding implements: Johnston makes the statement that
metates are of two types: circular and elliptical on the
grinding surface. He also mentions that fragmentary me24. To facilitate comparison, the organizational scheme used by Krieger,
1946, has been used.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

29

tates suggest that there was a third type "similar to the
Pueblo metate in which the motion of grinding was back
and forth and not in a circle or ellipse.’’~5
Six metates are mentioned in ~the notes. Three of these
were in room 2: one (broken) had been used in the construction of the wall base as a slab; one was on the first
floor level in the middle of the room; and one was standing
vertically against the north wall of the house. Two metates
were found in room 5, one on top of another with a "mano"
in the upper one. Johnston mentions specifically-that the
grinding surface of both of these was shallow and saucershaped and a. circular motion had been used in grinding.
These two metates each measured eight inches in diameter,
five and one-half inches in diameter of grinding surface, and
one inch depth of grinding surface. A sixth metate was
found on the outside of room 3 against the east wall. The
impression is given that the metates found in and against
the north wall of room 2 were somewhat larger than the
two found in room 5. The material of which the metates are
made is not mentioned but a fragment of one seen by the
writer is of a medium-grained sandstone.
Manos are nowhere described in the notes. Two have
been observed by the writer, as well as one muller. One of
the manos is of a fine-grained sandstone, rectangular with
rounded corners, (Plate 3, I, A) and has been used on one
side only. It measures five and one-half inches long, by
three and three-fourths inches wide, and one and one-half
inches thick at its maximum. The other is of a coarser sandstone, smoothed on one side only, and it is ovoid in shape.
Its dimensions are four and one-half inches long by three
and three-fourths inches wide by one inch thick at its maximum. Both manos are of the one-handed variety. The
muller (Plate 3, I, B) is made of quartzite, circular in shape
with a diameter of two and one-half inches and a maximum
thickness of one and one-half inches. A fragment is missing
on the top side so that the maximum thickness might actu-

25,

Unless otherwise indicated,

all quotations

are from Johnston’s notes.

3O

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

ally have been greater, and whether or not the upper side
was completely smoothed remains doubtful.
Pottery. A total of 1831 sherds have been examined by. the
writer. Of these, four are types of Pueblo pottery to be
discussed later. The remaining 1827, of which 138 are
rim sherds, are of one ceramic type which it is proposed
be called Stamper Cordmarked. The paste is fine to medium. The aplastic consists of sand and angular particles,
occasionally rather coarse, with mica being used frequently.
Bone may have been used as an aplastic; no evidence of
vegetable, clay or shell aplastic was found. In thickness
sherds vary from three mm. to ten ram. with the majority
being from five mm. to six ram. The hardness range is 2.5
to 3.5 with 3.0 the most common.
The interiors of the sherds are usualiy imperfectly
smoothed; a few are grass wiped. The exteriors of the
sherds are cordmarked with the exception of 6 rim sherds.
The cords used vary in size, and in many sherds some
smoothing after cordmarking is evident.
Cordmarking,
where apparent, is perpendicular to the rim although crisscross marking is often present near the vessel bases. Colors
range from tan to black with soot blackening occurring on
some sherds. Although no complete vessels were found,
shapes seem to be confined to globular, round .bottomed
jars, usually with straight rims placed vertically or flaring
outward slightly. Exceptions are eight rim sherds in which
the rim curves inward at the top (Plate 2, II: I and J).
There are no evidences of lugs or handles. The rims vary
in height from one-half to one and three-fourths inches,
and although they tend to meet the body at a gentle angle
(Plate 2, II: A and C) there are some instances of a
rather sharply angled juncture (Plate 2, II, B). The lip
form in the majority (eighty-four) of cases is flat with
thirty-seven instances of outward bevelling. Thirty lips
are rounded. Lip decoration consists of cordmarks (thirty-’
seven sherds), diagonal punctates (twelve sherds) (Plate
4, I and J) and circular punctates (two sherds) (Plate 4,
H); the majority (seventy-nine) are undecorated. Non-

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

31

cordmarked decoration occurs, although infrequently. It
is confined to the neck and lip, and in these cases the neck
is poorly smoothed (sometimes showing striations suggesting grass wiping), and the cordmarking begins at the
rim-body juncture. Rim decoration consists of: a single
row of depressions made by some blunt tool, parallel to the
lip and about three-eighths to five-eighths inches below it
(four sherds) (Plate 2, II, D and E; Plate 4, D); a single
row of depressions (blunt tooled) around the top of the
rim (seven sherds) (Plate 2, II, K; Plate 4, G); a thickening of the rim about one-fourth below the lip across which
are made diagonal incisions (four sherds) (Plate , II, F and
C, and Plate 4, F), or circular or rectangular punctates (one
sherd) (Plate 4, H and E).
Four Pueblo sherds are mentioned in the notes for 1934~
One piece of black-on-white pottery was found seven inches
beneath the surface at a distance of 17 feet north of the
northeast corner of room 3. It was found while removing
the surface sod preparatory to deeper excavation. It was
not within a house. Unfortunately, identification of this
sherd is not certain.
Three black’on-white sherds were found at a. depth of
22 inches below the surface, 4 feet from the east wall and
7~/2 feet from the north wall on the outside of room 3. At
three different places in the notes these sherds are assigned
to the area outside of room 3; at no place are they assigned to a room interior so that there is no possible confusion here. This point has been stressed because mention
has been made in the literature of black-on-white sherds
having come from the floor of room 2.26 There is no mention in the notes of any black-on-white sherds having been
found within a room. It should be noted again, however,
that the general levels about room 3 correspond to those
within the room and therefore that 22 inches beneath the
surface outside of room 3 would be roughly equivalent
to 22 inches below the surface within the room. Also the
26.

Clements, ~945, p. 68; Wedel, ]947, p.

150.

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

layer of gray ash and. dirt with bone and artifacts from
21~ inches to 223~ inches belo~w the surface in which the
three black-on-white sherds in question were found, "corresponds to the second level in house 3." The three sherds
in question have been identified by Dr. H. P. Mera as Rowe
Black-on-white.
Cutting, scraping, gouging and skin preparation. Most of
the chipped stone implements from Stamper site are made of
the so-called Alibates flint, a silicified dolomite, which may
be banded or plain and varies considerably in color. ~Iost
of the Stamper specimens are maroon and/or gray, both
solid colors and banded, but bluish and whitish pieces also
occur. This material is found at several quarries in a limited
area northeast of Amarillo, Texas; quarries which are approximately 100 miles south of Stamper.
Alternate bevel knives (Plate 3, I: F, G, and H) are indicated by both fragments and complete specimens. Twentyeight fragments, apparent~ly of 28 different knives, have
alternate bevelled edges. Because of their fragmentary
nature it is impossible to tell if the knives were bevelled on
four sides or not; on two fragments there is evidence of this.
Eight complete knives exhibit a bevel on four sides, are
diamond shaped, and tend to be pointed at both ends. In
dimensions they vary from 4~/4 inches long by 1~ inches
maximum width to 53/8 inches long by 13/s inches wide. The
widest specimen is 4~ inches long and 1% inches wide. One
specimen, (Plate 3I: I) 3~/4 inches in length, is pointed at
one end and round at the other, the bevel on the pointed end
being more steep than on the rounded end.
A unique kind of knife is pictured in Plate 3, I: J. It is
very well worked with flaking completely over both
surfaces. Two fragments may be of a knife similar to this
one. One knife is elliptical in shape, and 7% inches long,
(Plate 4, A) and as mentioned in a letter from Johnston to
Forrest Clements~7 "the flaking goes straight across .... "
From the diagram of the knife it appears to be different
27.

September 5, 1934.

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

33

from all other knives. The writer has not seen this artifact
as well as one other knife (Plate 4, C) which is well described in the catalogue. It is 51/~ inches in length and the
maximum width of 1% inches occurs about three-fourths of
the distance between the top and bottom of the knife as
opposed to the usual diamond shaped alternate bevelled
knives where the maximum width occurs roughly midway
between the two ends. According to the catalogue the "edge
of body outline is bevelled"--evidently not alternately, however. Johnston mentions a third unique type of knife
which is ovate in shape (Plate 4, B). Its dimensions are
roughly 4~A inches in length by 3 inches maximum width,
although due to the fragmentary nature of the specimen the
maximum width may be nearer the base and larger than
herein stated.
Very common are knives or scrapers made of large spa!Is
in which retouching is usually confined to the edges. In
general there are three categories into which these objects
can be divided. There are the long specimens with roughly
parallel straight or curving sides (Plate 3, I. M and N).
There are approximately 45 of this kind. Plate 3, I: O
shows a variant of this kind in which one end is worked
to a point with flaking on both surfaces of the pointed end.
Four specimens with one straight and one convex side are
exemplified in Plate 3, I: P and O. On two specimens
(Plate 3, I: P) one end is worked to a definite point with
alternate bevel. The third category includes twelve smaller
knives of varying shape which tend to be thinner than the
first subgroup (Plate 3, I: K, L, and R).
Forty complete and five fragmentary snub nosed or pianoconvex scrapers were found. There is a very fine gradation
of these artifacts from specimen to specimen. On the basis
of size and quality of workmanship, two groups can be indicated. One includes the small, very wel! worked scrapers
of which there are seven (average maximum dimensions
are ll/s inches wide by 1% inches long) and the other
thirty-three, the larger more crudely worked scrapers (average maximum dimensions are 1~ inches wide by 2½ inches

34

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

long). Three of the former have sharp cornered bits and
the body is tapered (Plate 3, II: C). Flaking is fine except
on the upper surface where longitudinal well controlled,
flakes have been removed. Two of the small scrapers have
a rounded bit and the body is not tapered (Plate 3, II: B).
The upper surface of these have smaller flakes taken from
them. In the larger snub-nosed scrapers flaking tends to
be cruder,, and there is more variation in body form
(Plate 3, II: A). One scraper is constricted in the middle,
the two notches having been made by chipping (Plate 3,
II: D). This might possibly have had some connection with
halting.
A unique specimen, made of alibates flint, is pictured in
Plate 3, II: W. One end is notched for halting. The two
sides and the other end are straight. Large thin flakes
have been removed from the top and the edges are finely
worked. One side shows more evidence of use than either
the other side or the working end. Plate 3, I: X shows a
unique corner tanged "knife" of alibates flint.
Small, roughly triangular, artifacts may have been projectile points but seem more likely to have been small knives
or scrapers (Plate 3, I: T, U, and V). In general flaking
is confined to the edges, and they are crudely worked and
tend to be uneven in all planes. There are 12 of this kind.
Sixty pieces of worked flint were undoubtedly used as
knives or scrapers, but they vary greatly in size and shape,
and are generally irregular--usually just worked flint
chips.
Sewing and punching.

Fragments and complete speciPLATE

I. Artifacts of stone. A, mane; B, muller; C, awl sharpener; D-E, arrowshaft polishers; F-I, alternate bevel diamond shaped knives; J-S, knives;
T-V, scrapers W-X, unique objects Y, greenstone "celt."
H. Artifacts of stone.
A-D, plane-convex scrapers; E, large triangular
unnotched
projectile
points;
F,
small
triangular
unnotched
proJeotlle
points ;
G,
triangular
side
notcl*ed
projectile
points,
concave base; H, triangular side notched projectile points, straight base;
triangular projectile points with side notches and base notch; J, triangular
projectile points with one notch (incomplete?); E:-L, unique pointsheavy dart points (~); O-:R, drills, S-U, reamers; ~r, fragmentary d,:ill;
double drill; X, elliptical drill; Y, fragments of mlcrocline.

A

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

37

mens of 18 flint drills were found. The shafts in general
are well worked and take one of two forms. Either the
shaft is roughly the same width for its entire length (Plate
3, II: O, P, Q, and R) or it narrows perceptibly toward
the point (Plate 3, II: S and T). A difference of use is
suggested here, the former being used primarily as drills,
the latter a combination of drill and reamer. Of the 10
specimens with head and shaft intact 4 are of the drillreamer shape. The drill heads or bases seem to take three
forms. One drill is definitely T-shaped in that the head
is narrow and crosses the shaft at right angles (Plate 3, II:
O). Three drills would seem to have chipped square or
rectangular heads, although the heads are not complete
(Plate 3, II: P and R). These bases of three drills seem
not to have been worked at all or in any definite shape
(Plate 3, II: S). On 10 drills it is impossible to determine
base form. A unique specimen is a double drill with a
shaft coming out of opposite sides of the "base" (Plate
3, II: W). One fusi-elliptical "drill" without base was
found (Plate 3, II: X). Fragments of two or three drills
(?) with very large bases are pictured in Plate 3, II: U and
V.
Bone awls made of longitudinally split deer metapodial
are common. In eight of these the proximal end of the bone
is present and slightly smoothed (Plate 2, II: G, H, and I).
In nine, the distal end is present and smoothed (Plate 2, II:
J and K). Awls of bone splinters (Plate 2, I: L and R)
were also found; usually but one end is worked. One bird
bone awl (Plate 2, I: V) was found.
Another kind of bone tool which we shall include in the
description of awls for want of a more precise name, consists of bone sections, rectangular or square in cross section, with all four sides usually well smoothed. In a few of
the specimens the underside includes some cancellous tissue which makes for roughness. Seven complete and five
fragmentary specimens were examined by the writer. Differences among them are based primarily on length and
a sharp or blunt point. Of the complete specimens three

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

were sharply pointed (Plate 2, I: P) and four had blunt
points (Plate 2, I: M, N, and O). The non-pointed end
was smoothed and tended to be rounded in all cases. Two
of the three pointed ones were the shortest, measuring
2% inches and 2% inches in length. The others ranged from
2v/s inches to 4~/4 inches in length. The foregoing figures
pertain only to the seven complete specimens. Both deer
and bison metapodials were used for making this kind of
awl.~e No eyed bone needles were present in the Stamper
The ten hones, or bone tool sharpeners, are made of coarse
(Plate 3, I: C) and fine grained sandstone suggesting either
use with large and small tools or possibly a graduated set
of sharpeners for tools in general. The coarse grained
blocks are unshaped with a groove on one surface in three
cases and on two opposing surfaces in the fourth. The
grooves tend to be deeper at the center of the stone than
toward the edges. Two of the fine grained sandstone
specimens are triangular in cross section, or roughly so, with
a groove on one surface. The grooves in these hones are
shallower than on the coarser stones. A third fine grained
sandstone specimen is rectangular in cross section with
grooves on three sides. One of the grooves might possibly
have been used for arrow shaft smoothing.
Woven artifacts. One large and several small fragments
of charred coiled basketry as well as charred yucca fibres
were present at the Stamper site.
Chipping impZements. Two hammerstones are mentioned, although not described, in the field notes and the
writer has seen neither. Seven antler tine tips may have
been used for flaking, or tapping, (Plate 2, I: W, X, and
Y). Four of them show definite signs of wear and polish.
One of the specimens may have had a squared working
end, although it is fragmentary.
28. One fragmentary specimen was triangular in cross section at its broken
end. although flattlsh at the other (rounded) end. Another specimen which
was with the Stamper material, but which bore no field number and which
is not specifically mentioned in the notes, was also triangular in cross section.
Although we cannot rightly claim this triangular cross sectioned variety as
typical of Stamper. its presence there is Indicated. To the east. in central
Oklahoma, at sites tn Custer and Garvin Counties° triangular cross sectioned
awls occur with g,-eater frequency.

The Optima Focus o:f the Panhandle Aspect:

39

Weapons. Small, finely worked projectile points are of
three main types: 43 triangular, unnotched points with
straight (predominant) or slightly concave base (Plate 3,
II: F) ; 48 triangular side notched points with concave (predominant) (Plate 3, II: G) and straight (Plate 3, II: H)
bases; 4 triangular side notched points with one base notch
(Plate 3, II: I). Two other points were possibly in process
of manufacture. These points are well worked and basic:
ally triangular with one notch in one side of each point
(Plate 3, II, J). All of the foregoing range from 3/4 inch to
1~ inches in length and are finely flaked on both sides.
Distinct from the small points are thirteen triangular
unnotched points which are somewhat larger (Plate 3, II:
E) and less finely worked. .They range from 1 inch to 1~
inches in length. Two corner notched points (Alibates
flint also) are considerably larger than the small points
(Plate 3, II: M and N) and may have been used as dart
points. Two other very small unique points are pictured
in Plate 3, II: K and L. One (K) is a crude side notched
point similar to many found in surface collections from
certain sites in central Oklahoma including Allcorn site
on the South Canadian River. ten miles north of Purcell.
The other (L) is a small corner-notched point with contracting stem.
Two fragments of arrow shaft smoothers were found
(Plate 3, I: D and E). Both are of fine grained sandstone,
rectangular in shape, with a longitudinal groove across the
top. On the broken end of one there is a small groove vertical and at right angles to the top groove. No shaft
wrenches were found.
Ornaments. The most common type of ornament found
were beads of Olivella shells with spire removed of which
there were ten (Plate 2, II: N). Five disc beads, four of
them with burial 1 were found. They appear to be made
of fresh water mussel (one seen by the writer). Also
with burial 1 were three cylindrical beads (none seen by
the writer). One of them has slightly convex sides, the
other two have straight sides.

,4O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Fragments of two pendants of shell, apparently of fresh
water mussel were found. One is pointed and may or
may not have been perforated (Plate 2, II: O); the other
is rectangular with a hole near the top (Plate 2, II: P).~
Stone ornaments consist of two worked fragments of
microcline~9 (Amazonstone variety) both of which are unperforated (Plate 3, II: Y).
Ceremonial objects. One complete and three fragments
of pipes were found. Only two small fragments have been
examined by the writer. According to the catalogue the
complete pipe, found under the left hand of burial I was
"white, fine-grained pipestone. Polished. Bowl meets stem
at slightly less than a right angle. Bowl is nearly uniform
in diameter while stem exPands slightly toward opening."
In the field notes the same pipe is referred to as "a small
L shaped clay pipe .... " Later in a summary report of
field notes it is referred to as "an elbow pipe" not mentioning the material from which it was made. The large
fragment of a pipe bowl is described in the catalogue as
"pipe bowl of red catlinite. Stem missing. Bowl is vase
shaped with constricted neck and slightly flaring rim. Polished.’’3o A fragment of polished black pipe of slate-like
material is not large enough to permit a knowledge of the
details of pipe form other than that there is a slight bulge
in the middle. The third fragment is of a fine grained
sandstone (siltstone) and composes one side of the pipe
bowl. It has a bulging side, constricted neck, with no
incision on the resulting flange. The two arms meet at right
angles. The stone is not polished although it is well
smoothed.
Bone "rasps" include one fragment of bison rib notched
along the inner edge (Plate 2, I: S) and one fragment of
29. Identified by C. A. ]Yferritt, mineralogist at the University of Oklahoma.
This mineral occurs in the granite at Pike’s Peak and l~lorlssant, Teller
County, Colorado. The mineral is a feldspar, tricllnlc and has the composition KAlSi3Og. In appearance the material ts similar to turquoise and could
be confused easily with it by the non-specialist.
30. This identification of the stone as catllnite may be open to question.
Pipes of fine grained reddish sandstone have been found at Antelope Creek
l~ocus sites in the Texas Panhandle and one has been found at Stamper.
It ts possible that this one was also of the same material.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

41

bison rib notched on the inner edge with a continuation of
the notches (although less deep) along the side of the rib
(Plate 2, I: T).

A fragment of deer metapodial with one-

half of the head removed has an incised line encircling it.
It is doubtful that it was intended as a "rasp" however.

A

second fragment of deer metapodial (Plate 2, I: U) has
three incisions encircling it, one of which is 2 inches below
the other two.
Miscellaneous.
Fragments of hematite pigment were
found as well as some worked fragments. One is an unshaped piece with a crude longitudinal groove in the upper
surface.
One piece of sandstone has been used as a stone on which
red pigments were ground. The stone is generally unshaped and the upper surface is smooth and thoroughly
covered with red pigment.
One large piece of mica (roughly 2~ inches by 2½ inches
by 21~ inches) was found. It is unworked and may have
been intended for use as tempering material for pottery.
Eight mussel shells were worked to a point at one end.
(Plate 2, II: Q and R). Other shells of this type, showing
signs of possible working at the posterior end, number 14.
They are not worked to a point, however. A notch near
the hinge on three of the pointed specimens seems not to
have been accidental (Plate 2, II: R).
Discs (Plate 2, II: L and M), all made of Stamper Cordmarked pottery, are represented by three fragments and
one complete specimen. The fragments are all perforated
centrally while in the complete specimen a central perforation was begun but not completed. These disc~s vary from
1~/4~ inches to 2 inches in diameter.
The edges are
smoothed.
An unperforated clay disc, or pellet, ~A inch in diameter
may have been a gaming device. It is undecorated and no
aplastic is visible. The edges are rounded.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

42

A very small, (11/~ inches high) apparently hand molded,
piece of clay (evidently not mentioned in the notes) is reminiscent of a vessel but certainly too small for such an object.

One side is cordmarked on the exterior surface.

parently no aplastic was used.

Ap-

The piece is tan in color.

Small "vessels" hand molded and with no aplastic have been
reported for the Henrietta Focus in north central Texas3,
end from the Bryan and Grant sites in south central Oklahoma, but it should be noted that these are scored, not cordmarked.
A piece of bison rib, split longitudinally, has been worn
at one end and forms a spatulate shaped object (Plate 2, I:
F).

The other end is broken.

!k fragmentary artifact may

also be of this kind, but both ends are broken. It is also
narrower than the first and polished on the back. A third
spatulate shaped object of bison scapula is shown in Plate
2, I: E.

The unbroken edges are bevelled.

One artifact, not seen by the writer, is a rectangular section of "large animal rib." According to the catalogue card
there is a perforation %inch in diameter and %inch from
one end of the object. The spongy tissue inside the bone
had been removed. The use of this object is not known
although it may possibly have been a pendant or a handle of
some sort.
One greenstone celt ground and polished on three sides
and pecked on the fourth, shows signs of considerable wear
(Plate 3, I: Y). The working edge is blunt with uneven
surface and there is some evidence of red pigment on it
suggesting its use in crushing hematite. It is not unlikely
that this artifact came to Stamper from the east through
trade. Here, we may have a case of diffusion of form of
an object but not of meaning, use, or function. In other
words, the object in question has the appearance of objects
31.

FLrieger, 1946, p. 110.

The Op!~ima Focus oy the Panhandle A~pect:

43

which, in the Lower Mississippi Valley and other areas

they are commonly found, are called celts. Presumably the use to which these celts was put was one of
chopping. The specimen at the Stamper site differs from
where

a bona ~ide celt in that the working adge has not been
kept sharp but rather is very blunt and rough.

Also the

red pigment in the roughened area suggests its use, not as
a chopping tool, but rather as a grinding tool: it was used
more or less as a pestle.
Dating o~ the Stamper Site
Assigning terminal dates to the occupation of Stamper is
fraught with some difficulty although we are fortunate
to have several kinds of utilizable data.
Three sherds of obvious Pueblo provenience, identified
by Mera as Rowe Black-on-white, were found at the site
just outside of room 3.

In that area of the village the oc-

cupation levels corresponded to those within room 3, and
the level in which the sherds were found corresponds to
the second occupation level inside room 3.

Furthermore,

underlying the north portion of that room and a considerable area surround it, was an ash layer measuring i inch
in thickness. Although no cultural material was found in
the excavated portions of the ash layer, it indicates occupation of the site prior to the time when room 3 was
built. That it represents an occupation by culturally similar
people (in spite of the absence of artifacts) is suggested by
the fact that part of the wall (which?) of room 3 was not
underlain by the ash bed but rather penetrated to an equal
depth. This suggests the wall’s contemporaneity with or
possibly antecedence over the ash layer. Suffice it to say,
that there is evidence of the occupation of the site at at
least two different times before the occupation during which
the Rowe Black-on-white sherds were laid down. If the
sherds had been found within a room, however, greater
surety could be had in using them as aids in dating the site.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Rowe Black-on-white dates from the late thirteenth century.3,A If the sherds arrived at Stamper at about that
period, and the site was occupied at two periods prior to
the time of their arrival, it is possible that initial occupation
dates from the thirteenth century, possibly the early or
middle years, although this cannot now be established with
certainty.
With regard to the final occupation date of Stamper and
possible reasons for abandonment, little can be said. Some
points which Krieger32 has discussed for Antelope Creek
Focus sites will bear repeating here. By 1541, the date of
Coronado’s entrada, the region of the Oklahoma Panhandle
as well as that of the Texas Panhandle was populated by
roving bands of bison hunters; there are no mentions in
Coronado’s account~3 of the villages, either occupied or deserted, now classified in the l~anhandle Aspect. We do not
know, to be sure, just how close to the sites Coronado’s
party passed.
His mention that the general area was populated by nomadic hunters suggests that one possibility for the abandonment of the Panhandle Aspect villages (including Stamper)
was attacks from hostile (and probably more warlike) tribes.
A second factor operative in the abandonment of the Panhandle Aspect villages is one which may have worked independently or in conjunction with the foregoing suggested
possibility. According to Weak]eye, with the exception of
the years 1454-1459, the period 1439-1468 was one of almost
continual drought in the Panhandles region. The effect
which such a drought would have on a people whose
economy was based on agriculture and hunting and who
31a. According to !~era (letter November 4, 1948) Rowe Black-on-~vVhite
was a ’rather minor, highly localized and short lived form found in only
a few of the upper Pecos Valley ruins."
The type dates from the late
thirteenth century, as mentioned by Wedel, 1947, and now reaffirmed by
]~Iera.
Regarding the dating, ~era says (letter, :November 13, 1948) "It is
unfortunate that no tree ring dates have been available for uncomplicated
Rowe sites.
Thus, deductions have had to be made based on intrusive
sherds associated with the Rowe type for which tree ring dates are known.
Dates obtained in this matter must be viewed as approx|mations with some
leeway allowed one way or the other."
32.
Ibid,
33.
Ibid.
34 ~v~eakly, 1943.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

C

A
D

6

~

1

Specimens of stone objects and of pot sherds,

j
l~edu(ted to half size.

45

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleon$olog~cal Society

Rim

sherd profiles.

FIGURE ]
The exteriors are to the right.

Reduced

to

half size.

inhabited an area which, at best, was not one of abundant
rainfall, is obvious. Either the drought or the hostile attacks
might well have been sufficient cause for a removal of the
Panhandle Aspect people to other areas; it is impossible
to believe that a combination of the two would have been
anything but disastrous.
Tentative terminal dates for the occupation of the Stamper
site then would be 1250-1450. It must be repeated that the
evidence is not conclusive, and that either date may have
to be revised in the light of evidence not yet available.

]~IGURE 2
Diamo~d-sh~ped k~ives with alternate bevels,

l~e~uced twenty 1}ercent.

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

47

Description of the Optima Focus
Although the Stamper materials have been unanalyzed
until the present time, they have been mentioned in the
literature in at least three classificatory contexts.
In 1939 Antle3~ proposed a scheme of classification for all
the archaeological manifestations in Oklahoma known at
that time. He listed the Stamper materials as constituting
the Beaver Creek Component, unnamed Focus, Canadian
Valley Aspect, Plains Phase, Woodland Pattern. In 1945
Clements36 referred to Stamper as an Upper Republican
Site. Finally, in 1946, Griffin3~ following either F. E. Clements or D. A. Baerreis or both, refers to the Stamper materials as belonging to the Cimarron Focus with no mention
of other taxonomic groupings or of companion materials
in the focus.
Because we now have a more complete picture of the
manifestation than previously and because a new Aspect,
the Panhandle, has been tentatively defined by Krieger in
a publication which succeeds the three foregoing in time,
it is suggested herein that terminology more in accord with
the present state of knowledge of the Stamper site be
adopted.
The reader who has followed the discussion must have
noted the marked similarities of the Stamper material to
both the Upper Republican Aspect as described by Strong,
Wedel, Champe, and others and the Antelope Creek Focus
of the Panhandle Aspect as described by Krieger. Table
I presents a visual impression of the similarities. The
closest relationships of Stamper, both quantitatively and
qualitatively, are to the Antelope Creek Focus. The differences between Stamper and Antelope Creek Focus are
considered to be of sufficient import so that we may define
a new focus, for which the name Optima is suggested.
Therefore, we may speak of the Stamper Component, Optima
35.
36.
37.

Antle, 1939, p. 350.
Clemen~s, 1945, p, 68.
Griffin, 1946, p. 85.

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Focus, Panhandle Aspect. Focal definition will, for the time
being be couched primarily in terms of the one site, Stamper,
but other sites in the same vicinity give indications of being
focally similar and it is expected that when they are~ excavated this will be born out in more detail.
There follows a list of traits of the Optima Focus which
actually forms a summary of the descriptive part of this
paper. This list, in form, follows that used by Krieger, not
only to facilitate comparison, but also because it is felt that
a prose listing, because it is more inclusive, is superior to a
simple trait list for many purposes. Summary tabulation
of traits is presented in Table I. It should be remarked that
the Optima Focus traits here mentioned have been found
in single association.
Type site:

The Stamper site, located on the first terrace

of the south bank of the North Canadian River (Beaver
Creek) two and one half miles south of the town of Optima
in Texas County, Oklahoma.
Other components: Probably several unnamed sites within a radius of five miles of Stamper. Possibly others as yet
unreported.
Economy:
Joint dependence on maize agriculture and
hunting-gathering. Charred corn cobs (11/~ inches length;
¯~/4inches diameter) are evidence for maize. No direct evidence of other food plants, of irrigation, or of fish remains.
Animals hunted were principally: bison, antelope, deer,
rabbit. Other small animals and birds also hunted. No evidence of seeds, nuts or berries although they may have been
used.
Village:
Situated on first terrace of North Canadian
River in defensible position close to agricultural lands and
fresh water supply. Twelve single unit single storied houses
in village with no observable planned arrangement.
Architecture:
Rooms, spatially separated from each
other, are square to rectangular in shape with square or
rounded corners. Walls tend to be oriented with sides in

The Optima Focus oj the Panhandle Aspect:

49

cardinal directions. Adjoining several rooms are small
circular or rectangular rooms which may have been used
for storage, sleeping or work space. These rooms are built
on to a larger dwelling room.
Wall construction consists primarily of a single base row
of vertically placed caliche slabs often set in a shallow
trench and with adobe reinforcements on the outside at the
base. Solid masses of adobe and large adobe blocks set in
dark clay also occurred as wall bases. Indications are that
the height of the wall and roof was attained by a clay
covered pole framework.
Rooms were constructed at ground level or slightly below.
Floors consisted of hard packed yellow clay. A central
unlined firepit ~vas usual. An entryway extended from
the center of one wall; seems not to have been consistently
oriented but away from prevailing winds.
Agricultural implements:
Bison scapula hoes with hafting details unknown. Digging sticks of bevelled bison tibia
with distal end usually perforated, probably for a handle.
Food storage:
Bell shaped caches are unknown. Circular pits or cists inside and outside of houses probably used
for storage. No stonelined cists reported.
Food preparation:
Grinding implements consists of merates with circular and oval basins in which rotary grinding
motion was used. Manos (all known are one-handed) are
rectangular with rounded corners or ovoid in shape.
Crudely shaped hammerstones of quartzitic material present.
Pottery exclusively utilitarian and all, excepting trade
ware, of one type called Stamper Cordmarked. Paste: fine
to medium. Aplastic: grit (including mica and sand) occasionally coarse, with possible use of bone. No shel!,
vegetable or clay. Thickness: 3-10 mm. with the majority
5-6 ram. Hardness: 2.5-3.5. Interior usually imperfectly
smoothed, exterior cordmarked. Colors: tan to black. No
complete specimens found but globular, round bottomed jars
usually with straight rims placed vertically or flaring out-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

5O

ward slightly; rare are incurving rims. Lugs and handles absent. Rims tend to meet body at gentle angle although sharp
junctures occur.

Lip decoration: undecorated, cordmarks,

diagonal punctates, and circular puntates. Non-cordmarked
decoration occurs infrequently; usually collfined to area of
neck and lip; single row of blunt tool depressions, thicl~ening of rim across which are diagonal incisions.
Cutting, scraping, skin preparation, etc.:
Various1y
shaped chipped knives, almost all of Alibates flint, including: diamond shape with alternative bevel; ovate; narrow
and slightly curved forms.

Piano-convex scrapers common

including small, well worked specimens and larger more
crudely worked scrapers.
ent.

Small triangular scrapers pres-

Crudely shaped flints probably used as knives or

scrapers.

Mussel shells with serrated edges and fleshing

tools of bison humerus absent.
Sewing, punching implements:
Chipped flint awls or
drills with unworked and worked bases, the latter including
square or "T" shaped varieties. Shafts tend to be of two
types--one with parallel sides, the other with sides w~hich
converge from base to point of shaft. One elliptical stone
drill present. Bone awls are of several kinds: common
are those of longitudinally split deer metapodial with either
the distal or proximal end present and usually smoothed;
awls of bone splinters present; one bird bone awl. A type
of awl consisting of a section of long bone, rectangular or
square in cross section with all four sides smoothed and the
working end sharp or blunt. Possible occurrence of similar
awl but triangular in cross section. No eyed bone needles
present.
Hones of both coarse and fine-grained sandstone. The
former are unshaped, the latter are triangular in cross
section.
Woven arti]acts:
Charred fragments of coiled basketry;
also charred yucca fibre.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

Chipping implements:

51

Antler tine tips for flaking and

tapping. Possibly hammerstones.
Weapons:

Use of bow and arrow indicated by numerous

small, thin, well worked triangular projectile points.

The

side notched type is present in slightly (possibly insignificant) numbers over the unnotched variety.
and concave bases in both types.
single base notch also present.

Both straight

Side notched points with
Distinctive are larger

triangular unnotched projectile points somewhat less finely
worked.

Two points were possibly used for darts.

Arrow shaft smoothers of fine grained sandstone rectangular in shape with longitudinal grooves across the top
present. Shaft wrenches absent.
Ornaments:
Shell beads: Olivella with spire removed;
disc and cylindrical. Pendants of fresh water mussel (one
perforated) and microcline (neither perforated).
Ceremonial objects: Elbow pipes of several fine grained
sandstone and slate-like materials. In color reddish, tan and
black. Bulging sided arms with or without flange. Tubular
or clay pipes absent. Bone rasps of bison rib with scorings
on one edge or edge and side. Also scored or notched
fragments of deer metapodial.
Burials:
Flexed and semi-flexed (?) burials in unlined
pits, usually sub-floor. Grave goods include personal ornaments (beads) and pipe.
Miscellaneous:
Worked and unworked hematite fragments. Coarse sandstone block for grinding pigment. Mussle shells worked to a blunt point at one end. Discs, perforated and unperforated, of Stamper Cordmarked pottery fragments probably used as spindle whorls. Small unperforated clay disc possibly used as gaming device. Diminutive hand molded "vessel" cordmarked on one side and
with no aplastic. "Spatula" of longtitudinally split bison
rib. "Handle" of split animal (bison) rib. Greenstone "celt"
ground and polished on three sides with blunted working

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

52

end, probably came to Stamper from east.
sherds.

Pueblo trade

Two fragments of troughed metates.
Archaeological A]filiations

The whole subject of the relationships of the Optima
Focus to other cultural horizons in the central and southern
Plains and the Southwest is one which, when studied in
detail, should augment considerably the present knowledge
of the culture history of these areas as well as to clarify
specific archaeological problems now recognized. It is felt
that such a study can profitably be made after more detailed
data are available not only for the Optima Focus but also
the Antelope Creek Focus, as well as other (?) as yet unknown loci of the Panhandle Aspect. For .the present, we
shall briefly discuss the affiliations of Optima Focus with
Antelope Creek Focus, Upper Republican Aspect and the
Southwest, including therein suggestions and problems for
future investigation.
Relationship to Antelope Creek Focus
Table 1 gives in summary form the similarities of the
Optima Focus to the Antelope Creek Focus. To the reader
already familiar with Antelope Creek Focus materials the
similarities are ver~ obvious. The differences, although few
in number, are worthy of mention here. Excepting architecture, the ten Antelope Creek Focus traits which are
absent at Stamper are:
Large number of rooms in single village,
Stone-lined graves,
Tubular clay pipe,
Beamers,
Bird bone beads,
Mussel shells with serrated edges,
Awls of metapodial--head unworked,
Eyed bone needles,
Antler tapping tools with squared end,
Cylindrical conch columnela beads.

The Optima Focus o~. the Panhandle Aspect:

53

Ten Optima Focus traits not reported from Antelope
Creek Focus are38
Large triangular unnotched projectile points,
Pottery,
Flattened shoulder,
Thickened rim,
Cordmarks on lip,
Circular punctates on rim and lip,
Large blunt impressions on rim,
Yucca fibre,
Disc beads of mussel shell,
Bulging arm elbow pipes without flange,
Cylindrical shell beads.
Probably-the outstanding difference between the Antelope Creek and the Optima Foci of the Panhandle Aspect
is in the realm of architecture. Although dwelling units
at all reported sites set this Aspect apart from otherwise
similar Plains manifestations in that caliche slabs were
often used in house construction, there are differences
within the aspect itself--differences, which, it must be
mentioned, cannot be fully interpreted at this time.
Krieger has already emphasiked the occurrence at Antelope Creek Focus sites of multiple unit dwellings, "Multiple
roomed pueblos of one story found at excavated sites which
also contain scattered single rooms." These may vary not
only in number of rooms but also in room size. In at least
one instance too, Antelope Creek, both Holden (1930) and
Johnston (1939) have remarked on the uneven quality of
workmanship from room to room, the quality improving
as one progresses from north to south.
At Stamper all rooms are of the single unit type.3~ This
situation is likewise reported from other sites in the immediate vicinity of Stamper as well as for Handley’s ruin

3g. Some of these traits may actually be duplicated in the two units and
may. with the publication of a complete descriptive analysis of one or more
of the Antelope Creek Focus sites, be shown.
39. !~ros. 2 and 2a may have shared a common wall In at least one period
of occupancy.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

on Wolf Creek in the Texas Panhandle. (It is interesting
to note that Wolf Creek is a tributary of the North Canadian
River entering it in Woodward County, Oklahoma, approximately 125 miles below Stamper and considerably out-side
of the area from which Panhandle Aspect sites have been
reported.)
In Antelope Creek Focus sites then, both single and
multiple unit dwellings occur while at sites tentatively
placed in the Optima Focus no multiple roomed dwellings
are reported.
A further, and possibly more important, distinction which
can be made, although its lines are not coexistent with the
division between single and multiple unit dwellings, is that
between the occurrence of a single or a double row of wall
base slabs. This difference, if the interpretation of single row
wall bases presented herein is correct, would be of utmost
significance as it would indicate two quite different types
of wall structurally speaking: walls of stone and mortar in
the case of the double row slab bases and walls of a pole
framework, probably covered with clay, associated with
the single row slab bases. Several (most?) Panhandle
Aspect sites from which requisite data are available seem
to have neither exclusively single or double row wall bases
although one or the other predominates. For example,
Hobbs mentions one "pole framework" room at Antelope
Creek and at Optima room 2 has a double row slab base
although all others are single. From Alibates, Mason4o
reports one room which differed from most (all?) of the
others in that it did not have the double row slab base.
The underground walls were of adobe or mud but
were solid and not built of adobe bricks as in the modern
Mexican style. Most of them were blackened by smoke.
.... In this room no stones were set into the tops of the
walls as was the usual practice ..... At four points at equal
distances from the fireplace where holes in the floor, which
details showed plainly represent the posts which upheld the

40.

~loorehead,

1931.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

roof.

55

Above most of the floors were found charred beams

turned to charcoal, clay burned .... "

At Handley’s ruin,

although the dwellings are of the single unit type as at
Stamper, the wall bases are predominantly, if not com-~
pletely, of the double row slab type.4,
Several other important differences between at least som~
of the Antelope Creek Focus rooms as described by Kriege~
and Optima Focus are the absence at the latter of 1) two
bins at either side of the entryway or ventilator; 2) the
"altar" at one end of the room; and 3) the depression in the
central section of the floor extending from the "altar" to
the opposite wall or entryway. There is no evidence fo~
the first of these traits at Stamper; a raised section, suggestive of the Antelope Creek Focus "altars" was found
at the west end of room 2, and a depression, similar to those
of Antelope Creek Focus was found in 2a. The relationship between the "altar" and depression (one occurrence
of each) at Stamper is not clear, although the rooms in
which they occurred evidently shared a common wall at
some time in the occupation of the site and may (?) at
another time have comprised, a single room in which th~
"altar" and depression could have been associated. Their
relative orientation, if the association did in fact exist,
was the opposite of that found in Texas: the depression
lies to the west of the "altar."
Although two distinct types of wall seem to have been
known both at Antelope Creek and Optima foci sites, the
predominant type at each differs rather markedly. For
Antelope Creek Focus sites, the predominant wall type is
described by Krieger42 "large slabs were placed vertically
in parallel rows, then the space filled with adobe and rubble, and other slabs mounted on them in the offset system

41. Whereas double-row-slab-bases were used in single unit dwellings, so
far as is known there are no instances of single-row-slab-bases (t. e. covei’edpole-framework .walls) for multiple unit .dwellings. This is not surprising, for
would it not be impossible to nave multiple dwellings with the covered-poleframework walls? Or stated in another way, would not one possible Important
reason for multiple roomed dwellings. I. e. one wall to serve for two rooms,
be absent where the covered-pole-framework wall was used?
42. Krteger, 1946~ p. 43.
’"

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

described by Holden43 .... Many walls were built simply of
unshaped stones held together with liberal amounts of
adobe mortar." At Stamper, if the evidence has been interpreted correctly herein, the walls consisted of a pole
frmmework covered with some perishable or semi-perishable material, probably clay. One room of the latter type
has been mentioned for Antelope Creek Focus and one
room at Stamper may have had the stone wall type charactertistic of Antelope Creek Focus sites.4~
The artifactual inventories of the two loci, are, with the
few exceptions listed, very similar and it would not be surprising to find that the lists diminish in size as future
excavation is undertaken.
Relationship to Upper Republican Aspect
Table I presents in summary form not only the traits
shared by the Optima Focus and Upper Republican Aspect
but also those which one has to the exclusion of the other.
It must be remembered too that in Table I Optima Focus
is represented by only one site whereas the Upper Republican Aspect list is compounded from a number of sites;
it is possible that the differences would be fewer if a larger
number of Optima Focus sites had been excavated.
Exclusive of architecture, seventeen Upper Republican
Aspect traits not found in the Optima Focus are:
Beans and squash,
Notched bison scapula hoe blades,
Bell shaped cache pits,
Hachure or grid on rim of pottery,
Triangular chipped knives,
Beamers,
Eyed bone needles,
Antler tapping tools with squared ends,
Shaft wrenches,
43. Holden,
44. It would
handle Aspect
what effect, if

]930, fig. 2.
be interesting to know the m~xinaum distance st which Panvillages were located from caliche quarries. In other words,
any. did quarry locale have on village location?

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

57

Bird bone beads,
Bone bracelets,
Antler bracelets,
Bone pendants,
Pierced deer phalanges,
Bone gambling pieces,
Secondary burials,
Bone fishhooks,
Nineteen Optima Focus traits not reported from Upper
Republican Aspect sites:
Villages in defensive positions,
Bison metapodial digging sticks,
Metates,
Manos,
Pottery,
Circular punctates on rim and lip,
Large blunt impressions on rim,
Narrow curved chipped flint knives,
Flint drills, unworked head,
Flint drills, square head,
Bird bone awls,
Bone awls, rectangular in cross section,
Coiled basketry,
Yucca fibre,
Small triangular projectile points, unnotched,
Perforated mussel shell pendants,
Microcline pendants,
Pipes, elbow, bulging arm with flange,
Bison rib rasps,
Sub-floor burial.
Optima Focus architecture, compared strictly from the
point of view of quantitiative trait listing, would appear
to vary considerably from that of the Upper Republican
Aspect. However, there are nine important similarities:
Relatively small number of rooms per village,
Single unit dwellings,
Dwellings rectangular in shape,

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Four central support posts,
Central unlined firepit,
Lateral entryway,
Walls of poles,
Poles covered with some other material,
Roofs dome shaped.
Four significant differences between the architecture of
the Optima Focus and the Upper Republican Aspect houses
are:

Upper Republican houses are semi-subterranean;
Optima Focus probably not (certainly not as much so
in any case).
Wall poles in both cases are covered, but the material
probably differs; grass or earth for Upper Republican
Aspect houses and clay for those of Optima Focus.
The caliche slabs at base of wall in Optima Focus rooms
are completely lacking in Upper Republican Aspect
houses, as well as use of solid adobe and adobe blocks in
wall bases.
Small storage rooms adjoining some Optima Focus
rooms absent in Upper Republican Aspect houses.
Both the Optima Focus and the Upper Republican Aspect
peoples are seen as having been maize agriculturalists and
hunters, possibly an approximately fifty-fifty division of
time between the two types of activities in either group.
Settlement was in relatively few single unit dwellings located on stream terraces. Houses were rectangular with
four center posts and covered pole framework, giving a low
dome shaped appearance. The use of stone and adobe in the
wall bases of the Optima Focus houses and not in Upper
Republican Aspect houses represents a significant difference between the two. So far as artifactual content is concerned, similarities far outweigh differences and the latter
are oftentimes minimal. Those indicating dietary differences,
i. e. fishhooks present in Upper Republican Aspect sites

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle A~pect:

59

and absent in Optima Focus, and those indicating trade relationships, are probably among the most important.
The problem of genetic or ethnic relationship between Upper Republican Aspect and Optima Focus is one which will
not be dealt with to any extent in the present paper. The
writer is in agreement with Krieger in the belief "that the
peoples of this focus [,amtelope Creek] were Plains agriculturalists who pushed southward from one valley to another as far as eastern New lYIexico.",~ This statement
could not be expanded to include peoples of the Panhandle
Aspect, including both the Antelope Creek and Optima Foci.
Furthermore, the following observations might be made at
the present time:
1. The traits of the Panhandle Aspect are more similar
to those of the Upper Republican Aspect than to any
other recognized Plains manifestation.
2. A larger number of Optima Focus traits than Antelope Creek Focus traits are similar to those of the
Upper Republican Aspect.
3. The greatest differences (quantitatively and qualitatively) between Antelope Creek Focus and Optima
Focus are in the realm of architecture.
4. The architecture of Antelope Creek Focus reflects
greater Pueblo influence than does that of Optima
Focus.
Relationships to the Southwest
There is little of a general nature that the present writer
is able to add to Krieger’s discussion regarding the relationship between Panhandle Aspect and the Southwest so far
as artifacts are concerned except to suggest that the possible
sites from which "Plains" elements could have diffused to
Pecos should be enlarged to include Optima Focus sites.
As to architecture, it is clear that much of the Pueblo influence found in Antelope Creek Focus houses is not pres45.

I~rleger. 1946. p. ~3.

6O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ent in Optima Focus houses. In fact, one of the most important differential characteristics may be the presence or
absence (absolute or relative )of Pueblo architectural influence in Panhandle Aspect sites. It has already been suggested, albeit cautiously, that a time difference as well as
culture change may be reflected in architectural types.,6
So far as artifacts are concerned the relationship between
Antelope Creek Focus and the Southwest and Optima Focus
and the Southwest seem very similar. In the realm of architecture Antelope Creek Focus has more similarities to the
Southwest than does Optima Focus.
Final Remarks
The following statements are offered in the nature of
hypotheses which may serve as the basis for problems for
future research. Clearly, much more excavation in the
Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles is needed to clarify many
of the points which still remain cloudy. It should be emphasized that these statements are not offered as conclusively proved facts. It is suggested:
That Panhandle Aspect peoples were Plains agriculturalists, with a culture identical or closely allied to
that which is now referred to as the Upper Republican Aspect, who pushed southward.
2. At some time after their arrival in the valley of the
North Canadian River (and tributaries?) a natural
resource of the region, caliche, was discovered.
This natural resource, heretofore unusued by (possibly unknown to) these people, was used in house
building, at first merely in a supplementary way.
Caliche slabs were used as a reinforcement or protection at the base of the house walls; none were
used in the walls proper.
46. At first glance the photographs and description of several of the
Optima Focus rooms are reminiscent of those of many Basketmaker HI houses
(Cf. l~oberts, 1929, p. 11 and Fig. 2).
Upon closer examination, however,
numerious differences are seen, and the problem of ~vhat. if any. Influence
of Basketmaker architecture there was on Optima Focus architecture,
mains for future investigation.

The Optima Focus o~ the Panhandle Aspect:

61

Some of these people continued to push southward
into the area now known as the Texas Panhandle.
At some time, presumably through contact with
Pueblo peoples of the Southwest~ the caliche became
a basic architectural component i. e. it was used
in actual construction of house walls.
o

The influence of Pueblo architecture on that of the
Panhandle Aspect peoples was probably first manifested in the area now known as the Texas Panhandle (possibly the South Canadian River Valley)
and the resulting architectural type evidently
reached its highest development and greatest use
there.
The influence of Pueblo architectural practices was
evidently felt at least as far north as the valley of
the North Canadian River although it probably was
never as important or widely used there as it was
to the south.

Other interpretations should not be ruled out, of course.
It is also conceivable that use of caliche was first made in
the area where it seems to have reached its highest development, the valley of the South Canadian River, and that its
use in the North Canadian valley represents but faint reflections of borrowing and diffusion from the south.

No

definite answer is now available.
Finally, it is worthy of note that the whole problem of
culture change and acculturation in the area of the Texas
and Oklahoma Panhandles at the time with which we are
dealing here, is not a simple one.

Krieger has pointed to the

matter of selective borrowing.’~

The diffusion of ideas or

traits from one group of Panhandle Aspect people to another
and the changes which took place in the culture of the var47.

Krieger,

1946,

p.

73.

62

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ious groups of the Panhandle Aspect over a period of time
are subjects, investigation of which would prove interesting
and rewarding.
Washington University
Saint Louis
TABLE I
Presence-Absence Trait List For Optima Focus, Antelope
Creek Focus And Upper Republican Aspect*

TRAIT

ECONOMY3
Maize agriculture
Hunting-gathering
Evidence of fish use
Evidence of beans and squash
VILLAGES
Defensive positions
Relatively small number of houses
Relatively large number of houses
Located on stream terraces
HOUSES
Semi-subterranean
Rectangular to square
Four central support posts
Entryway lateral
Entrance through roof
Ventilator lateral
Plastered floor

~g

~-~°~
"~

x

x

x

x

X

X
X
X

x
x
x

X

N

x

x

x

X

X

x

?

?

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

-

x

x

x

-

* X ~ present; -- ~ absent; ? ~ incomplete evidence, presence suggested.
1. From Krteger, 1946.
2. From Krleger, 1946 and Wedel, 1940.
~. Two facts should be mentioned at the outset: a) that the writer has
not examined materials of either the Antelope Creek Focus nor Upper Republican ~_spect firsthand; and b) the list is as detailed as published data
and Optima Focus material will allow.

The Opti~na Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

Central unlined firepit
Central clay lined firepit
Roof flat
Roof low dome-shaped
Walls of poles
Poles covered with brush and earth
Poles covered with clay
Single row base slabs
Double row base slabs
Base of solid adobe or adobe blocks
Wall of stone set in clay
Small adjoining rooms
Storage bins at entryway
"Altar"
Depressed central portion of room
Single unit dwellings
Multiple unit dwellings
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS
Bison metapodial digging stick points
Bison scapula hoe blades
FOOD STORAGE
Bell-shaped cache pits
Cists in floors
Cists outside houses
FOOD PREPARATION
Metates
NIanos
I-tammerstones
Pottery
Aplastic grit
Aplastic bone
Color commonly grey or brown
Paste
Soot blackening common
Globular
Round bottomed
Straight rim, vertical or flaring

63

X

-

X

X

-

X

X

-

X

-

X

X

-

X

-

X

-

X

-

X

X

-

X

X

X

-

x

x
x

-

?

X

X

x

X

X

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x

64

Texas Archeological c~nd Paleontological Society

Rounded shoulder

O.F.
x

Flattened shoulder

x

,~.C.F.
x

x

-

x

Handles absent

x

x

x

Exteriors cordmarked

x

x

x

Thickened rim

x

-

x

Incised notches on rim

x

x

x

-

-

x

Incised hachure or grid on rim
Incised lines on lip
Cordmarks on lip

x

x

x

x

-

x

Circular punctates on rim and lip

x

-

Large blunt impressions on rim

x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

CUTTING, SCRAPING, SKIN
PREPARATION, ETC.
Knives
Diamond shaped with alternate bevel
Ovate
Narrow curved
Triangular
Snub-nosed (piano-convex) scrapers
Oval sidescrapers
Mussel shells with serrated edges
Beamers of bison metapodial, scapula,
and humerus

x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x

x

Bone awls rectangular in cross section x

x

Eyed bone needles

x

x

x

x

SEWING, PUNCHING IMPLEMENTS
Flint
Flint
Flint
Bone
Bone
Bone

dri!ls with T-shaped head
drills with unworked head
drills with square head
awls of metapodial, head worked
awls unworked
awls of splinters

Bone awls of bird bone

Sandstone hones

x

x
x

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

65

A.C.F.

U.R.A.

WOVEN MATERIALS
Coiled basketry
Plaited and twined basketry
Yucca fibre

X
X

CHIPPING IMPLEMENTS
Bone and antler flaking tools with
rounded ends
x
Antler tapping tools with squared ends x

x

X

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

-

X

X

-

X

X

-

X

X

X

X

-

X

X

-

X

WEAPONS
Small, triangular, unnotched projectile
points, chipped on both faces, bases
straight to concave
Small, triangular projectile points,
chipped on both faces, two side
notches, bases straight to concave
Small, triangular projectile points,
chipped on both faces, two side
notches, one base notch
Larger, triangular, unnotched
projectile points
Larger dart points
Shaft smoothers, sandstone, longitudinal groove
Shaft wrenches of antler and bison rib

x

x
-

ORNAMENTS
Beads of bone
Beads of Olivella with spire removed
Beads, disc, cut from mussel shell
Beads, cylindrical, cut from
mussel shell
~Beads, cylindrical, cut from
conch columnella
Bone pendants
Pendants, mussel shell, perforated
Pendants, turquoise (?), microcline
Pendants, clawlike, of shell

x
x
x

x
x

X

X

66

Texas Archeologica! and Paleontological Society

CEREMONIAL OBJECTS
Stone pipes, elbow, bulging arm
Tubular clay pipes
Rasps, deer leg bone
Rasps, notched bison rib
Pierced deer phalanges
Gambling pieces of bone

x
x
-

X

x
X

X

BURIALS
Primary, flexed and semi-flexed
x
Secondary, in ossuary
Stone lined graves
x
Subfloor burial
No grave goods except personal effects x
MISCELLANEOUS
Pottery discs cut from sherds
Bone fishhooks
Obsidian
Steatite
Hematite

x
x
x
x

x
-

x
X

x
x
x

x
x

x
78

81

X

x
x
x
x
x
71

ANALYSIS OF TABLE I
Of a total of 114 traits:
Optima Focus has 78, or 68.4% of the total.
Antelope Creek Focus has 81, or 71% of the total.
Upper Republican Aspect has 71, or 62.2% of the total.
Of the 114 traits, 41, or 35.9%, are shared by all three:
41 universals are 52.5% of the 78 Optima Focus traits.
41 universals are 50.6% of the 81 Antelope Creek Focus
traits.
41 universals are 57.7% of the 71 Upper Republican Aspect
traits.
Of the 114 traits:
10, or 8.7%/occur only in the Optima Focus.
16, or 14%, occur only in the Antelope Creek Focus.
14, or 12.2%, occur only in the Upper Republican Aspect.

The Op~ma Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

Of the 114 traits:
17, or 14.9%, occur only in Optima Focus and Antelope
Creek Focus.
10, or 8.7%, occur only in Optima Focus and Upper Republican Aspect.
6, or 5.2%, occur only in Antelope Creek Focus and Upper
Republican Aspect.
On the basis of 73 non-universal traits, these percentages become respectively 23.2, 13.6, and 8.2.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Antle, H. R.
1939 "A proposed nomenclature for Oklahoma archaeology," American Antiquity, Vol. IV, No. 4 (April).
Clements, Forrest
1945 "Historical sketch of the Spiro Mound," Contributions from the Museum o~ the American Indian, Heye
Foundation, Vol. 14 (New York), pp. 48-68.
Gould, Charles N. and John T. Lonsdale
1926 "Geology of Texas County, Oklahoma," Oklahoma
Geological Survey Bulletin, No. 37.
Griffin, James
1946 "Culture change and continuity in Eastern United
States archaeology," Man in Northeastern North
America. Papers of the Robert S. Peabody Foundation
for Archaeology, ed. Frederick Johnson (Andover), pp.
37-95.
Hobbs, Hulda R.
1941 "Two Texas Pan_handle ruins," El Palacio, Vol.
¯ XLVIII, No. 6 (June), pp. 121-129.
Holden, W. C.
1930 "The Canadian Valley expedition of March, 1930,"
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, (Abilene), pp. 21-32.

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Johnston, C. S.
1939 "A report on the Antelope Creek Ruin," Ibid., Vol.
11, pp. 190-202.
Krieger, Alex
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, The University of Texas Publication, No. 4640
(Austin).
1947 "The eastward extension of Puebloan datings toward cultures of the Mississippi Valley," American Antiquity, Vol. XII, No. 3 (January), pp. 141-148.
Moorehead, W. K.
1931 Archaeology o] the Arkansas River Valley, (New
Haven).
Roberts, F. H. H. Jr.
1929 Shabik’eshchee Village: a Late Basketmaker Site
in the Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 92 (Washington).
Six, Ray L.
1930 "Beaver, Texas, and Cimarron Counties," Oklahoma Geological Survey Bulletin, No. 40-VV.
Weakly, H. E.
1943 "A tree ring record of precipitation in Western
Nebraska," Journal of Forestry, Vol. 41, No. 11.
Wedel, Waldo
1940 "Culture sequence in the Central Great Plains,"
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 100 (Washington), pp. 291-352.
1947 "Culture chronology in the Central Great Plains,"
American Antiquity, Vol. XII, No. 3 (January),
pp. 148-155.

THE LEE SITE, Gv3, OF GARVIN
COUNTY, OKLAHOMA1
KAI~L SCHMIT’f

Introduction
The following is a preliminary report on the Lee site,
which was reported to the Department of Anthropology of
the University of Oklahoma by Messrs. Frank and Phil Newkumet of Norman, OMahoma, in 1948.

Permission to ex-

cavate was graciously given by Mrs. Eva Lee, the owner,
and Mr. Carl Bowen, the leasee, who are to be commended
for not allowing unauthorized persons to excavate.

Be-

cause of their alertness, an important aboriginal site has
been preserved for scientific investigation and has not,
as has happened so often in the past, been destroyed by
indiscriminate digging. Mrs. Lee, in addition, has presented the University Museum with an excellent surface
collection of artifacts from the same site. The Newkumet
brothers have also loaned items from their collections which
were found on the surface of the Lee site. The present
paper considers these surface finds along with those made
by the Department of Anthropology.
Thanks are due to Professor J. Willis StovalI, Director
of the Museum, for identification of the animal bones from
the refuse; to Professor R. E. Bell, Chairman of the Department of Anthropology, for identification of the flint
specimens from the quarries of Kay County, Oklahoma,
and ~Potter County, Texas; and especially to Mr. Alex
Krieger of the University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, who examined a selected series of potsherds,
identified "trade" sherds, commented on the general characteristics of the local wares, and edited the manuscript.
I.

Since the completion of this report, an area of intensive occupation

llas been discovered on the C. E. Lace), Farm, which overlooks the Gv3 site.
Approximately seventy-five cache or refuse pits, a few burials, charred
corn, and several possible house sites were removed by bull dozer activity
in construction of a slush pit for an oil well. A large number of artifacts
were salvaged and appear to represent a slm|lar series to those reported
herein.

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The site is located on the wooded, north bank of the
Washita River in Garvin County, Oklahoma, approximately
three and one-half miles east of the town of Lindsay, and
is referred to as Gv3 in the museum files. The occupation
appears to have been confined to the first terrace, or T1 of
the geologists. Surface evidence consisted of concentrations
of gray ashes, charcoal, broken animal bones, flint chips,
broken stones, .and occasional artifacts.
A trial L-shaped trench with twenty-five foot arms was
oriented to cross two areas of concentration of surface material; this orientation deviated slightly from north-south,
east-west axes. When the plow-disturbed soil was removed, a sub-soil of a red, sandy loam was exposed; against
this background the pit outlines showed as dark areas conraining flecks of charcoal, burned earth, and bone fragments. As this was a preliminary test it was decided
to excavate by six inch levels; howevqr, the levels are of
little significance since they cross-cut the sloping stratigraphy which developed in the pits discovered. An attempt
was made to keep all the material found in the excavation,
but perfection was not obtained. Some irregular sandstone and limestone fragments, water-worn pebbles, and
shells were inadvertently discarded by students, and a number of grinding-stone fragments and hammerstones were
presumably lost.
Traits o] the Gv3 Site
To facilitate comparison with other sites in the southern
Plains area, as well as to give an indication of the type of
life led by the former inhabitants of the site, the traits~ will
be presented in a summary fashion as Krieger, has done for
the various archaeological manifestations of northern Texas.
Because of the nature of this approach, some inferences have
to. be included with the basic data.
Economy: A major portion of the subsistence was gained
by hunting, gathering, and fishing. On the basis of bone
1. Alex I¢:rieger, Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas.
The "University of Texas Publication i~o. 4640 Austin, 1946.

The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma

71

refuse, it can be said that the chief animal hunted was the
deer, but jack rabbits, tortoises, and wild turkey were also
important food items. Bison bones were present but not
plentiful. Freshwater mussels of several species, turtles,
and catfish were obtained from the river. There is no direct
evidence of agriculture, but there is a very strong possibility
that it played an important part in the subsistence pattern. The large number of mano, grinding-stone, and bone
hoe fragments, and the pits, are strong circumstantial evidence for the presence of agriculture.
Village: The distribution of surface material, which occurs in five or more oval areas of ten to thirty feet in
diameter each, indicates that there was some concentration of population. Sporadic evidence of occupation exists
in many nearby areas and other concentrations of material occur on the Edna Frankenburg farm, a mile to
the west of the Gv3 site. It is possible that these two areas
were inhabited contemporaneously.
Architecture: There are meager data for this phase of
life. A few post molds indicate that house patterns may be
found with more extensive excavation. Pieces of firehardened clay containing grass impressions strongly suggest the former presence of houses which were daubed with
mud and grass.
Agriculture ImpZements: A fragmentary portion of a
bison scapula hoe (Plate 9, Fig. 7) was found near the surface over pit 1. A spine from a bison scapula, which exhibits extensive battering marks where it joined the main
portion of the scapula, is almost certainly refuse from the
manufacture of a hoe, Blade fragments of another scapula
hoe and a bison skull hoe were surface finds.
Food Storage: Portions of three large pits, which the Indians had dug and used, were excavated by the field party.
Since these were filled with refuse, their use as food storage
pits is only inferential. 1Viany historic tribes of the low
Plains area used similar pits in which to store agricultural
products for portions of the year and often filled them with
refuse after the original contents were removed.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Pit 1 was found in squares OR2, OR3, NIR2, N1R3 and
undoubtedly extends into N2R2 and N2R3 (see Plate 5).
The portion of this pit in squares OR2 and OR3 was completely excavated; the bottom was essentially flat wiih a
depth of forty inches below the surface on the east and
west and thirty-eight inches at the center.

The east wall

was slightly undercut while the west wall was undercut
~six inches suggesting a bell-shaped pit. The portion of this
pit in squares N1R2 and N1R3 was excavated only to a
depth of eighteen inches. The shape of the pit appeared
to be irregularly oval with diameters of thirteen and ten
feet.
Pit 2 was found in the south portion of squares OR2 and
OR3 where it intersected pit 1. The bottom of this pit
was fifty inches below the surface. This feature appears
to have antedated pit 1 since the ashy fill of the latter extended to and over pit 2.
Pit 3 was located in squares N3R1 and N4R1 and extended
into the adjoining unexcavated squares to the north and
west. Pit walls were straight in the north profile and
sloping in the west profile; the bottom was fiat with a
maximum depth of forty inches below the surface.
All the pits were filled with refuse including ash lenses,
fire-cracked rocks, broken bones, flint chips, potsherds, and
many pieces of limestone and sandstone. A sterile reddish
layer in p~it 1 may indicate reuse of the pit for storage
after some use for trash disposal. It should be pointed out
that there appears to have been extensive erosion of this
site and that contour plowing was subsequently employed
as a conservation measure. The soil remaining around two
trees near the excavation indicates that two to four feet
have been eroded away and that the pit depths were
greater originally.
Food Preparation: No hearths were found. The large
number of fire-cracked rocks and the ash lenses in the
refuse indicate, however, that hearths were present else-

The Lee Site, Gv3, o] Garvin County, Oklahoma

~~~~ . . . . . . , ,~ ~
Reddish
~R OFILE

PIT

Groutad plcan o~:,excava~[o_.r3_
PLATE 5
l~[ap and ground plan of exeavatlon of Gv3 site.

73

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

74

Temper

Limestone ..................
Limestone-Shell ......
Linestone-Shell-Bone
Bone ............................
Sandstone

102
1~.1
17
,!,
65

Sandstone-Shell "__.....~
Coarse Sand ..............
Clay .........................

4
60

Shell ...............................
Fine Sand .....................
Total

55

where in the vicinity.

428

1
1
1

1
9

1
8
8

1

2
2

103
121
17
4
65
5
68
1
58
11
453

Pottery from this site indicates

use over a fire since many sherds exhibit blackened areas.
There were 453 pottery sherds, of which 306 are from
the surface or plow-disturbed zone. From a technical standpoint they are extremely difficult to classify.

The sherds

are, in general, thick and poorly manufactured from an
aesthetic viewpoint. Large coils, poorly welded together,
and an excessive amount of coarse tempering material are
outstanding characteristics of the series. Surface finish
of the great majority of the specimens was produced by
careless smoothing so that many striations are visible. Other
sherds were cord-roughened and then partially smoothed,
fabric-impressed, or polished. A detailed classification of
the tempering material and surface finish is given above.
The limestone and sandstone temper occurs as unusually
large pieces, some measuring as much as 6 ram. in diameter;
the shell is usually finely ground, though some large particles occur; the coarse sand is visible to the unaided eye as
rounded grains of quartz; the fine sand is detected by a
slight roughness to touch; and the bone occurs as large
particles exhibiting cancellous areas.

It should be stated

that the above temper classification is not strictly accurate:

The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklaho~na

75

a sherd with predominate limestone-shell temper may have
an occasional fragment of sandstone or bone visible. It is
also possible that finely ground bone may have been occasionally confused with fine shell particles.
Several pottery traditions, in addition to some exotic
pieces, are represented. About 373 plain sherds (those in
column 1, except for those tempered only with shell) are
tentatively called "Lindsay Plain" and appear to be locally
made varia~uts of one type. It is possible that further
knowledge of the pottery in this area will require a
subdivision of this type on the basis of tempering material.. However, in the Lee site at least, the plain sherds
tempered with lin~estone, limestone-shell (Plate 6, Fig. 12),
limestone-shell-bone, crushed sandstone, sandstone-shell,
coarse sand (Plate 6, Fig. 4), and bone are alike except in
the choice of aplastic. The surfaces are poorly smoothed
and bear many striations caused by brushing and scraping.
Vesse! shapes are not completely known; large jars with
straight or flaring rims, thinned and rounded lips, expanded
bodies, and thick flat bases protruding downward are indicated.
A second tradition is represented by the sand-tempered
and cord-roughened group (Plate 6, Fig 8). These sherds
seem most closely related to specimens from the group of
sites known as the Antelope Creek Focus, in the Panhandle
of Oklahoma and Texas, but similar pottery may also be
rather widspread in the southern Great Plains as far south
as the Red River.
Most of the plain, shell-tempered sherds are relatively
thin and are ~ a third tradition. Krieger has identified
these as belonging to the Nocona Plain pottery type (Plate
6: Fig. 1, 2, 7) which is the characteristic undecorated ware
of the Henrietta Focus of North Texas.2 Three rims of this
type from the Lee site are everted and have thickened and
flattened lips. One body sherd of this group possesses a

1.

Ibid. p.

2,

Ibid. pp. 109-10.

44.

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

small raised node (Plate 6, Fig. 2).

One specimen (Plate

6, Fig. 7) of this variety appears to be a portion of a pottery
disc.
Five or less of the plain, shell-tempered group seem to
represent a fourth tradition. These are extremely thick
and have an excessive amount of tempering material consisting of large shell flakes. One found on the surface exhibits a raised circular appendage with a depressed center
(Plate 6, Fig. 3). This fragment, from a survey of the literature, is most like sherds from the Norris Basin in Tennessee,2
but presumably has counterparts in the Arkansas area:
Six gray polished sherds are probably from one bottleshaped vessel since the interiors were not smoothed. These,
and a red-slipped sherd, are considered by Krieger to be
definitely like Sanders Plain~ in their paste and feel. Two
engraved sherds (Plate 6, Fig. 5 and 6) indicate contact
with Sanders Focus of North Texas and the Spiro Focus of
Eastern Oklahoma..
Most of the unusual sherds were found on the surface, but
some were found in undisturbed association with those of the
Lindsay Plain type. One shell-tempered, cord-roughened
rim sherd (Plate 6, Fig. 10); one sand-tempered, cordroughened body sherd; and one cord-roughened body sherd
tempered with sandstone and shell were from pit I. One
polished sherd, referable to Spiro pottery, came from the
fourth level of pit 3.
Grinding-stone and mano fragments indicate preparation
of food, presumably corn, but possibly wild seeds. Seven
pieces of such stones were found on the surface and seven
from undisturbed levels in the pits. Flat, fine-grained sandstone slabs from one to two and one-half inches in thickness with roughly shaped edges predominate. Grinding
on most was over the entire surface and usually on one
surface only. One specimen possessed a raised sill, while
2.
William S. Wehb, An Archaeological Survey of the Norris Baein
Eastern Tennessee, B. A. :t~. Bulletin 118. Washington, 1938. Plate 79b.
3.
Krieger, Op, CIt, pp, 188.

in

The Lee Site, Gv3, oS Garv~n County, Oklahon~a

79

two others showed pecked and ground depressions, the
latter indicating grinding by a rotary motion.

Four mano

fragments of one-hand size were recovered, two from the
surface and three from undisturbed portions of the pits.
One sandstone specimen is roughly rectangular with rounded
corners, is wedge-shaped, and has well-worn grinding surfaces. Another is of sandstone, roughly oval, wedge-shaped,
and has two pecked and slightly worn grinding surfaces.
The other two manos are loaf-shaped and exhibit one flattened grinding surface.
Sixteen hammerstones of water-worn quartz, quartzite,
and chert pebbles were recognized. Twelve were from the
surface or plough-disturbed zone and four from the pits.
These were originally rounded pebbles and measured from
one and one-half to four inches in length and one to
three inches in thickness. Flakes had been struck from
them, perhaps accidentally, and the edges were battered.
In addition to their use as flint flaking tools, these hammerstones were probably used to crush animal bones. Among
the large number of such bones recovered there were no
whole long bones of deer or buffalo. The many bone splinters and joints which indicate gouging of the cancellous bone
suggest that the former inhabitants crushed and boiled the
bones in order to obtain the marrow or grease, as did many
historic tribes of the area.
The bones also indicate something of butchering techniques. A number of proximal and distal ends of long
bones have parallel scratches apparently made in the process
of severing the joints. Some ribs, vertebrae, two deer mandibles, and one pelvis have similar incisions, indicating
the use of stone knives.
. Cutting, Scraping, Skin Preparation: Two knives of approximate diamond-shape were found on the surface.
These are beveled but not on opposing sides. One specimen
(Plate 9, Fig 15) is made of flint from Kay County, Oklahoma; the other (Plate 9, Fig. 16) may be of Amarillo
"flint."

Texas A~cheolo~ical and Paleontological Societ~

Eighteen snub-nosed scrapers, one of which was from an
undisturbed level, were recovered. All but one of these
were manufactured from flakes so that the concave flake
scar remains, and the chipping occurs on the other surfaces
(Plate 9, Figs. 12, 18). One well-made specimen (Plate 9,
Fig. 19) appears to have been reworked from a diamondshaped knife and has two opposing beveled sides meeting
in a point and a steep bit.
Side-scrapers (Plate 9, Fig. 13) numbered five or more.
It is rather difficult typologically to separate side scrapers
from a large series of flakes with retouched edges. Eightysix of the latter were collected and ranged from those with
intentional, well-chipped edges (Plate 9, Fig. 14) to those
with ragged edges, probably accidentally produced in the
process of scraping bone.
Two scrapers have two large concentric flake scars indicating they may have been struck from a core. The edges
were beveled by fine retouching. One of these (Plate 9,
Fig. 20) is of Kay County flint.
Five flint flakes were found with worn or polished
edges indicating intensive use for scraping. One former
projectile point (Plate 9, Fig. 17) has all the edges worn
smooth in a similar fashion. Nine blades of basically triangular shape also may have been scraping implements or
may represent steps in the manufacture of other implements. One spall (Plate 9, Fig. 10) has a small chipped
"graving" point.
The chisel-like implements of bone were probably skinworking tools. Two of these were manufactured from the
flattened portion of the shaft of a bison tibia (Plate 8, Fig 2).
Two other chisel-like specimens appear to have been reworked from a broken tool Of a class often known as "digging stick tips," (Plate 8, Fig 1). They were manufactured
from bison tibia and presumably possessed holes in the
proximal ends before they were broken and reused.
Three abrading implements of red sandstone wi~h flattened sides and shallow striations were found and were

The Lee Site, Gv3, ol Garvin County, Oklahoma

81

9

~0

21

24
PLATE 7
Type shapes of flint artifacts from Gv3 site.

22

25

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

probably used to sharpen such bone tools. Eighteen fragments of small, flat sandstone slabs also appear to have
been used as abrading implements.
A piece of a bone beamer or drawshave (Plate 8, Fig. 5)
was made from a deer cannon bone and presumably was
used in dressing skins.
Sewing and Punching: Three flint awls or drills were
found on the surface. One was relatively crudely chipped and possessed side notches (Plate 7, Fig. 22); another
was definitely T-shaped (Plate 7, F’:g. 21); the last specimen had a straight base, slight side notches, and a beveled
point (Plate 7, Fig. 20).
Bone awls were common. Eleven were manufactured
from splinters (Plate 9, Fig 3); some were made merely by
grinding a point on a rough splinter; others were completely smoothed. Two well-made awls. were of split and
highly polished deer cannon bones (Plate 9, Fig. 2). Another
was made from the cannon bone of an immature deer and
the end was ground off so that the billowed symphyseal
surface served as a natural serrated decoration (Plate 9,
Fig. 1). A crude specimen was made from a deer cannon
bone. Two awl fragments were manufactured from sections of animal ribs. One awl was made from a large fish
spine (Plate 9, Fig 4).
Sandstone hones were used to sharpen pointed implements. Three pieces of medium-grained red sandstone
bear sharp grooves; two specimens of coarse sandstone, apparently cemented by an iron compound, have grooves
which tend to run the length of the stone (Plate 8, Fig. 10).
One small faceted hone could have been used to sharpen
awls in the same way as the sandstone hone mentioned
above.
Chipping or Flaking Tools: Two complete specimens of
deer ulnae or olecranon bones with the tip worked may
have been flakers (Plate 8, Figs. 3 and 4). A tip of a
PLATE 8
l]~t~e and stone at-t|i’acts I’t’o~,l Gv3 site.

!
2

6

Bone and stone artifacts

The Lee Site, Gv3, oS Garv~n County, Oklahoma

85

similar specimen was also found, and three ulnae with
fractured tips possess high use-polish and may be broken
specimens.

A portion of a deer antler with a large, blunt

end (Plate 9, Fig. 6) and a fragment of a thin antler cylinder
(Plate 9, Fig. 8) could have served similar purposes.
Weapons: Arrowpoints are small, of a variety of shapes,
and almost entirely surface finds. Plate 7, Figs. 1-19, 23-25,
indicate the outline shapes present and the number of
specimens of each type. In addition, forty-seven fragments of projectile points were unclassified.
The above points were largely manufactured from flakes
struck from flint or dense-grained, gray quartzite pebbles. The debris of manufacture indicates that pebbles of
wide variety were collected. The technique appears to
have been to strike successive flakes running the length of
the pebble and then to specialize suitable flakes into points.
A number of flint cores with one small water-worn surface
indicate this technique. The larger specimens of projectile
points might be called dart points. In view of the predominance of small points and the wide variety of flint collected, it is very possible that these larger more atypical
specimens were collected by the former inhabitants as possible manufacturing material.
One fragment of a well-made sandstone shaft smbother
(Plate 8, Fig 8) came from an undisturbed portion of pit
1. A second specimen of very friable sandstone was similar but with a very shallow groove. A third well-made
specimen of sandstone (Plate 8, Fig. 9) may have been a
shaft smoother in the process of manufacture; it is broken
along the groove, which is too angular to have been used
for smoothing cylindrical arrows.
Three fragments of "shaft-wrenches" made from deer
radii were found on the surface (Plate 8, Fig. 6). Two
show that the distal end was cut off and two exhitit the
hole cut through the shaft near the proximal end. One
has a worn groove about the diameter of a modern arrow
shaft to one side of the hole. All have high use polish.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Weaving:

A single shell-tempered sherd bears the im-

pression of a small gauge, square-meshed net and indicates
the use of fabrics.
Ornaments:

A small bead cut from a section of bird or

rabbit bone (Plate 9, Fig. 9) and a rough section of a mammalian long bone, apparently representing a step in the
manufacture of a bead, were found on the surface.
bone pendant

(Plate 9, Fig. 5)

A

of a polished and per-

forated mammaliar~ rib was also found on the surface.
Ceremonial Objects:

A fragment of a pottery pipe bowl

may represent such an object.

The crudely incised and

punctated design is indicated in Plate 6, Fig. 11.
Burials:

No evidence was present.

Evidence o] Trade:

One large celt of greenish igneous

material with oval cross section and tapered poll (Plate
8, Fig. 7) was found by Mrs. Lee.
locally.

This stone is not found

The poll of a similar celt, a smaller specimen of a

tan material, and a small rectanguloid celt with a blunted
bit were also found by Mrs. Lee.

All these specimens have

a roughened area on the poll.
Trade in flint is indicated by five artifacts manufactured
from banded, Kay County, Oklahoma flint, which contains
fusulinid fossils, and three artifacts and one flake of redbanded agatized dolomite from the vicinity of Amarillo,
Texas. Trading connections may be indicated by the minority pottery wares; the thinner, shell-tempered sherds were
.identified by Alex Krieger as Nocona Plain, predominate
type of the Henrietta Focus of North Texas; the sherds
with a polished exterior were identified by Krieger as
from the Caddoan archaeological area, and most probably from sites of the Sanders and Spiro Foci; and finally,
the sandy tempered, cord-roughened sherds are closely
related to those from sites of the Antelope Creek Focus of
the Oldahoma-Texas Panhandle.

I0

12

The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garv~n County, Oklahoma

89

Conclusion
The evidence from the Lee site indicates the former inhabitants relied on a dual economy of hunting-agriculture of
the general type found in late prehistoric archaeological
horizons of the Low Plains and adjoining portions of the
High Plains from Northern Texas to ~orth Dakota. This
way of life .was also followed by many historic tribes, such
as the western Caddo, Wichita, Omaha, Mandan, and
Hidatsa. An actual date for the occupation of the Lee site
is not known at this time; the lack of European or Colonial
trade material, except for one possible gun flint (Plate 9,
Fig. I1) from the surface, indicates that it was pre-1600 A.
D. The presence of the Nocona Plain pottery type, which
is characteristic of the Henrietta Focus, also suggests the
same time period since Krieger assigns 1600 as the terminal
date for the Henrietta Focus. The sherds attributable, or
closely related to the Sanders and Antelope Creek Foci
indicate that the occupation may extend back to 1300 or
1400 A. D. Correlation with any historic tribe is not possible at this time.
Department of Anthropology
University of Oklahoma
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Krieger, Alex D., Culture Cor~plexes and Chronology
in Northern Texas, University of Texas Publication No.
4640, Austin, 1946.
2. Webb, William S., An Archaeological Survey of the
Norris Basin in Eastern Tennessee, B. A. E. Bulletin
118, Washington, 1938.

POPULATION SHIFTS IN THE

PRE-SPANISH SOUTHWEST
ERIK K. REED
For a thousand years, from at least 200 A. D. to about
1200 A. D., the entire Southwest was occupied largely by
Indians of a general "Pueblo" type of culture.

During the

period a rapid but steady development of Pueblo civilization and an evident general increase of human population
throughout the Southwest may be observed. Few definite
movements of groups of people are specifically traceable.
Here the term "Southwest" includes New Mexico, Arizona,
southwestern-most Colorado, southern Utah, and the Virgin
River-Moapa Valley section of southern Nevada. The term
"Pueblo culture" refers to a-distinctive way of life, characterized by primary dependence on intensive agriculture;
large compact villages, with undeveloped political organization; rich and complex ceremonialism; highly advanced arts
and crafts, such as the weaving of cotton and the manufacture of painted pottery; various tools of stone and of wild
animal bones (no metals and no livestock before the coming
of the Spaniards). Rather different archaeological materials are found in the deserts of southern and western
Arizona--the "Hohokam culture" of the Gila-Salt area, and
the "Patayan" archaeological remains representing the ancestors of the historic Yuma-speaking tribes of western
Arizona.
Among the population shifts recognizable before 1200 are
those in the Flagstaff district following the eruption about
1066 A. D. of Sunset Crater. A colony of Hohokam (the
non-Puebloan Indians of southern Arizona) moved up from
the Verde Valley to the Flagstaff district around 1070 A. D.;
and other small groups from still farther west seem to have
come into the area of the Sunset Crater ash fall.
About fifty years later the Sinagua Pueblo group of the
Flagstaff district, having absorbed the Hohokam and other
foreign colonists, spread southwest and superseded the Ho-

Population Shi]ts in the Pre-Spanish Southwest

91

hokam in the Verde Valley. Probably this was largely
a process of absorption or "cultural conquest" rather than
actual displacement. In another generation or so, around
1150 A. D., the Sinagua (or converted I-Iohoikam) of the
Verde evidently spread down into the Salt River Valley,
profoundly modifying the Hohokam culture there. As has
been pointed out by A. H. Schroeder, the modern Pima Indians probably derive essentially from this basic SinaguaHohokam combination of 800 years ago.
But these movements, and others less visible or even
~totally unrecognized, did not entail total ab.andonment of
any portion of the Southwest. Many individual sites were
deserted, but the inhabitants merely moved to other locations in the same general vicinity. The entire region evidently was occupied into and through the ll00’s.
Toward 1200 A. D., or soon after, the peak appears to
have been passed in certain parts of the Southwest. Decline
of population and even actual abandonment of areas began;
and in the last quarter of the thirteenth century, the drought
period of 1276-99, more extensive tracts were permanently
deserted.
These effects are seen especially in the northern Southwest--the plateau area of San Juan Anasazi culture. The
distinctive Anasazi culture found before 1300 A. D. in the
upper Rio Grande, the San Juan drainage, and the northern
drainage of the Little Colorado is characterized by gray
pottery (black:on-white, rough plain, corrugated), fullgrooved stone axes, typical rather standardized circular
kivas (ceremonial chambers, frequently semi-subterranean),
predominance of flexed (contracted) burial, and the lambdoid type of artificial cranial deformation (cradle-board
flattening of the back of the head).
The peripheral extension of Pueblo culture of San Juan
Anasazi affiliation west of the Colorado River--across the
Kaibab Plateau north of the Grand Canyon to the Virgin
River drainage in southwestern Utah, and down that stream
to the Moapa Valley in southern NevadaMseems to drop

92

Texas A~cheological and Paleontological Society

out of the picture, or at any rate to lose touch with the main
parent group

(east of the Colorado River, between the

Little Colorado and the San Juan) by 1200 A. D. or earlier.
The people of Chaco Canyon in northwestern New Mexico,
one of the great early centers~of Anasazi development, may
have cut down too many trees in building their immense
houses and so brought about the channeling of the prehistoric arroyo. For some reason, at any rate, the population
declined and the Chaco Canyon pueblos were abandoned,
probably late in the ll00’s or early in the 1200’s. There
seems to have been a rapid dwindling of Chaco population
after a high peak reached comparatively early, apparently
by 1100 A.D. The people who left Chaco Canyon between
1130 and 1200 undoubtedly m~ved for the most part eastward to the upper Rio Grande.
By 1300 A. D., all the rest of the San Juan was abandoned.
In the period 1250-75 the Anasazi congregated into cliff
houses and large defensible open pueblos. Fairly extensive
tracts seem to have been left unoccupied in many districts, in contrast to the earlier pattern of scattered small
villages in almost every livable spot.
It appears that there must have been a general decline
of total population, and also a definite threat from enemy
peoples such as Utes or Apaches. But the final abandonment came right at the time of the drought period of 127699. The last tree-ring dates from Anasazi sites in the San
Juan drainage are 1284 and 1286. Presumably the Anasazi
abandonment of the San Juan was forced by arroyo-cutting brought on by the drought. Very possibly the diminishing and weakening of the Anasazi by the destruction of
their farm land and the lowering of the water table, made
them vulnerable to attack by nomad enemies; yet there is
no positive evidence to show that either Utes (including
Paiutes) or Apaches (including the Navajo) were in the
region. The rather numerous defensive structures and the
occasional indications of violence could quite possibly mean
interpueblo strife over declining water supply and other

Population Shifts in the Pre-Spanish Southwest

basic resources.

93

Whatever the explanation, the Anasazi had

left the entire San Juan drainage by 1300 A. D.; and they
never came back to the Four Corners region. At just the
same time the very peculiar group in the Largo-Gallina
area also disappeared.

In the great dispersal of the San

Juan Anasazi, the Kayenta pe.ople of the Tsegi unquestionably went into the Hopi country when they left Betatakin, Kietsiel, and other localities; very possibly--as one
of the Hopi’ migration traditions states--by way of Wukoki
("Wupatki"). The rest of the San Juan Anasazi, from the
Chinle. eastward to the Rio Puerco~ plus those of southeastern Utah as well as southwestern Colorado, were all of the
Mesa Verde cultural phase in the 1200’s.

Those of the Can-

yon de Chelly district in northeastern Arizona probably
joined the Hopi. What became of those in southeastern Utah
is not known. Those of northwestern New Mexico and of the
Mesa Verde district proper, in southwestern Colorado, came
over to the Rio Grande, particularly into the Galisteo Basin
area south of Santa Fe. The characteristic Galisteo Blackon-White pottery of around 1300 is actually indistinguishable
from Mesa Verde Black-on-White of the preceding century.
To the south, primarily in the forested mountain zone of
the Mogol!on Rim country from the Flagstaff district southward and eastward to southwestern New Mexico, during
this period, the other Pueblo groups, which may be referred to as cultures of Mogollon affiliation, generally increased and advanced, except in southwestern New
Mexico. These--the Pueblo groups of Mogollon derivation
--are distinguished from the San Juan Anasazi by polished
brownware (plain, red-slipped, polished corrugated, blacksmudged interior, black-on-white and various types of
painted pottery, well-made ~ grooved polished stone axes,
rectangular kivas or no recognizable kivas, vertical occipital cradle-board deformation of the skull, and in many
groups the practice of extended inhumation (burial at full
length on the back).

94

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

In southwestern New Mexico the unique Mimbres culture
disappeared--whither is uncertain---during the 1200’s; and
occupation of the Mimbres Valley area in the fourteenth
cenutry was very sparse.

A little to the north and west,

the Upper Gila-Tularosa area was permanently abandoned
toward 1300 A. D.
But the major Pueblo area of central and east-central
Arizona--the entire Salt River drainage and adjacent districts--reached its height as the San Juan and Mimbres
were being abandoned. Not only attaining a climax of
population and richness of culture within its central area,
this "Western Pueblo" complex expanded territorially as
the San Juan Anasazi group shrank. ~As exemplified at
such great pueblos as Tuzigoot and Kinishba and those .of
Point of Pines, this group is Characterized by polished redware or brownware (including notably glaze-paint polychrome redware), polished ~/4 grooved stone axes, rectangular kivas, vertical occipital cranial deformation, and universally extended burials.
Except for the last trait, these supersede the corresponding (contrasting) San Juan Anasazi diagnostics in both the
Hopi country and the Zuni district about 1300 A.D. A still
further extension of "Western Pueblo" cultural influence--presumably by actual migration of a small group of.people
--brought Acoma into close relation with Zuni. The movement extended eastward to .the Rio Grande around 1325
A. D., bringing glaze-paint redware and possibly other
western traits such as square kivas.
In the 1300’s, then, Pueblo population had concentrated
already on the upper Rio Grande and in the Zuni and Hopi
areas, and the San Juan lay abandoned; but all of central
and southern Arizona, from the Agua Fria drainage to the
vicinity of the modern New Mexico State line, and from
Prescott to the Petrified Forest, from Winslow to Douglas,
was still occupied, and so was much of ~southern New Mexico
mrather scatteringly west of the Rio Grande, rather heavily to the east in the E1 Paso-Alamogordo area.

Population Shi]ts in the Pre-Spanish Southwest

95

Finally, about 1400 A. D. or soon after, these extensive
areas in Arizona south of the Hopi country and in southern New Mexico away from the Rio Grande valley were
abandoned also.

What the reason was we cannot be sure;

Apache pressure seems a likely possibility.

This left only

the historic pueblo areas, as found by the Spaniards in the
sixteenth century: the Hopi group, the Zuni group, the isolated pueblo of Acoma on its great peno!, and the Rio
Grande area from Taos to San Marcial.
There were, however, a few more Hopi pueblos in the
1400’s .than the five of the early-historic period between
1540 and 1680 (Awatovi, Walpi, Shongopovi, Mishongnovi;
Oraibi) ; and occupation of the Zuni country or "Cibola" was
heavier in the 1400’s than the six towns of 1540-1680 (Hawikuh, Kyanawa, Kwakina, Halona approximately at modern Zuni pueblo, Kyakima, Matsaki). In the Rio Grande
numerous pueblos of the fifteenth century, notably in the
lower Chama River area and the Pajarito Plateau, had been
abandoned before the arrival of the conquistadores.
The people of eastern central Arizona no doubt joined
their congeners in the Zuni country; and evidently so also
did a group from much farther south in Arizona, bringing
with them the Hohokam practice of cremation of the dead.
Unquestionably the Homolovi people of the Winslow vicinity
and the Sinagua of Chaves Pass and the Verde Valley moved
in to Hopi. What became of the separate group around
Prescott is not certain.
The inhabitants of areas in southern New Mexico abandoned after 1400 but before 1540 presumably went to swell
the Pueblo population of the Rio Grande Valley; the "tBiscuitware" people of the Chama-Pajarito district undoubtedly joined their "kindred in the Tewa district just north of
Santa Fe. The fate of the Mogollon Pueblo people of Chihuahua, who disappeared about this time, is not known.
Other later population shifts are historically documented:
the disappearance of the Piro pueblos (on the Rio Grande

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

below Isleta, around Socorro, and in the hills south of
NIountainair); the congregation of the Jemez into a single
settlement by the missionaries; the departure of the Tano
or Southern Tewa from the Galisteo Basin, and the founding of modern "Tewa" or "Hano" (Los Tanos) in the Hopi
country by a part of them about 1700; the destruction of
Awatovi in 1700-01; the reoccupation of only a single location by the Zuni after the period of rebellion and reconquest
(1680-1706); the founding of Laguna in 1696-99; the decrease of the Tiwa pueblos after 1540, abandonment of the
Bernalillo vicinity in 1680 and refounding of Sandia alone,
with refugees persuaded to return from Hopi, in the 1740’s;
the eighteenth-century decline and 1838 abandonment of the
great pueblo of Pecos.
But the basic continuities of Pueblo culture and population can be traced from the earliest known periods into
modern times, with two major traditions carrying through
--the northern or San Juan Anasazi archaeological division very probably correlating with the Tanoan-speaking
pueblos of the upper Rio Grande; and the Mogollon or
"southern brownware" tradition connecting up broadly or
essentially with the later Western Pueblos of the Hopi, Zuni,
and Acoma, as suggested by brownware (i. e., red, orange, or
yellow, as against the gray pottery typical of San Juan
Anasazi) and rectangular kivas.
The people who today still live as Pueblo Indians within
seventy-five miles north and south of Santa Fe and at Laguna, Acoma, Zuni, and the Hopi villages in northeastern
Arizona subsume the biological and cultural heritage (to
which still other additions have been made) of the rich and
varied civilization of the native Southwest which, a thousand
years ago, extended from the Pecos River to Nevada, from
Moab to Chihuahua, and which has in basic essentials survived the repeated blows of drought and arroyo channeling,
Apache incursions, Spanish Catholic controls and influence,
and the impact of modern technological civilization.

AN EXPERIMENT IN RELATIVE DATING OF
ARCHEOLOGICAL REMAINS BY
STREAM TERRACES1
JACK T. Huch~s
Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to indicate the value of
stream terraces in relative dating of archeological remains.
Two different chronological arrangements of the same cultural materials are presented for comparison: one based
on stratigraphic, typological, and other non-physiographic
evidence; and one based on stream terraces.
In the summer of 1948, an opportunity arose to work in
an area which is particularly well-suited to this purpose.
Angostura Reservoir, the area investigated, is located at
the southern tip of the Black Hills, on the Cheyenne River
in Fail River County, South Dakota. Stream terraces are
well-developed, and archeological remains frequently occur both in and on them. The remains represent diverse
cultures and periods. Tentative cultural classification and
tempo~:ai arrangement of many of the remains have been
made possible by considerable non-physiographic evidence.
Investigations were part of the saivage program being
conducted by the Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys, Missouri Valley Project. During three and a hail
months, from June 3 to September 16, Mr. J. l~I. Shippee
and I explored the area for archeological remains, and
tested, with a few local helpers, some of the most promising sites discovered. For two weeks of this period, we as1. This article owes much of its content and form to stimulating conversation with Dr. Theodore E. White, vertebrate paleontologist of the Smithsonian Institution River Basin Surveys, and to helpful criticism by Dr. Alex
D. Krleger, archeologist of the University of Texas; Mr. Glen I~ Evans,
geologist of the Texas l~femorlal ]~fuseum, and Dr. ~raldo R. ~Vedel, archeologist of the U. S. National Museum.
Any value possessed by the paper
should be credited largely to them; any defects, solely to me.
The paper was written in the spring of 1949, but was .not submitted for
publication at that time, since more intensive archeological,work was
planned for the summer of 1949, and since there .was some promise of more
thorough geological work as well. Geological work was not continued, however, and the paper stands essentially as first written. Further archeological
work has greatly amplified and somewhat modified the picture presented
here, but not to such an extent that revision seems essential.

98

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontologica~ Society

sisted Dr. Theodore E. White in a detailed study of the
terraces at one locality, and in a general survey of terracing
throughout the area. Terrace study in the vicinity of the
Long site (39FA65), a buried occupational area with lanceolate~shaped, obliquely-flaked points, was carried out by
means of borings, profiles, and sections. Terracing elsewhere in the future reservoir was observed from several
vantage points, widely toured, and examined at various
strategic places. This type of investigation, although leaving much to be desired, was greatly facilitated by the generally clear definition of the terraces, and by the open vistas,
active erosion, and scant cover of the country. Results of the
geological work have been presented in another report
(White and Hughes, no date).
Sequence Based on Stratigraphic, Typological,
and Other Evidence
To date, seventy-one sites have been recorded in Fall
River County. Five of these were recorded from reports
and have not been visited; fifty have been examined but
not tested; fourteen have been tested more or less extensively; and two have been excavated.
The sites represent a variety of peoples, from nomadic
hunters to sedentary farmers, who have lived in the area
from late Pleistocene or early Recent to protohistoric or
historic times. Twenty-four of the sites possess a total of
twenty-nine components which are assignable to eight complexes, tentatively labeled "loci," of different ages. Cultural classification and temporal arrangement of these loci
have been discussed in another paper (Hughes, 1949). Terrace data were not analyzed prior to preparation of that
paper; as a result, the sequence therein is based principally
on non-physiographic evidence.
This sequence is reproduced in Figure 1. The loci are
listed, with the oldest at the top, as follows: Hot Springs,
Cheyenne Falls, Jackson Narrows, Limestone Butte, Sheps
Canyon, Horsehead Creek, Red Canyon, and Dry Creek.
(The usual practice of listing from youngest to oldest has

Experiment in Relative Dating o] A+’cheoIog~cal Remains

. No~:

F<~i li~

~-~th o~htest at to++

P.LA TE lo
Stre<~m terraces ~nd areheological remains <>f the Cheyenne River
age of Western South Dakota.

99

100

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

been reversed in order to facilitate comparison with the
terrace sequence, the older terraces being hi~her than the
younger ones.)
Sequence Based on Stream Terraces
Five major terraces, at elevations above the stream bed
of approximately 160, 80, 40, 20, and 10 feet, are recognizable. In the terminology of geologists of the University
of Nebraska State Museum, these may be designated, respectively, T-4, T-3, T-2, T-l, and T-0. Since no remains
were found in or on T:4j it does not concern us here. The
remaining terraces are shown in generalized cross section
by Figure 1. T-3 forms mesa-like benches; T-2, broad, extensive flats; T-1 and T-0, narrow crescents. Floods frequently cover T-O, occasionally T-l, but do not appear to
have covered T-2 in historic times.
Terrace composition, revealed by numerous cut-banks,
generally conforms to the pattern indicated in Figure 1. At
the base of each terrace is bedrock (Pierre shale at most exposures); above this is the terrace body, usually grading
from coarse channel fill near the bottom to fine floodplainfill near the top; and above this is the terrace veneer, consisting of sand and silt dropped by wind, washedfrom adjacent slopes, or deposited by exceptional floods at a time
when deposition normally was confined to the next lower
terrace. In the latter case, at least, the veneer theoretically
corresponds in age mainly to the body of the next lower terrace. Sediments of the veneer usually are different in appearance from those of the body. The change may be abrupt
or gradual; it sometimes is marked by a soil zone. Composition and thickness of the veneer depend largely on local
conditions, and vary widely within a single terrace as well
as between different terraces.
It is obvious that the Cheyem_ne River and its tributaries
in the Angostura area have lowered their channels to a considerable extent from the time of formation of the highest
terrace to the present, and that the terraces reflect an alternation of erosional and depositional conditions throughout

Experiment in Relative Dating oS Archeological Remains

101

this lowering process. The terraces may have resulted
principally from alternate erosion and deposition on each
side of a valley due to much stream meandering; they may
have resulted chiefly from alternate erosion and deposition
throughout a valley due to major climatic fluctuations; or
they may have resulted from a combination of these and
other factors.
If the terraces are chiefly meander benches, they are not
necessarily correlative with terraces elsewhere. If they
are mainly climatic features, they should be correlative
with terraces of the same kind where corresponding climatic
fluctuations and gradient conditions occurred. If they are
partly meander benches and partly climatic features, correlation would be difficult but perhaps not impossible.
Whether terraces are meander benches, climatic features,
or both is a problem which must be solved in each drainage before correlation of remains by terraces (or of terraces
by remains) from one drainage to another can be made. The
use of independently dated archeological remains as index
fossils should be a valuable supplement to standard geologica! methods in determining the nature of terraces in mar~y
drainages.
For present purposes, however, it makes little difference whether Angostura terraces are meander benches or
climatic features, since in either case they are useful in suggesting the relative ages of the remains associated with them.
Twenty of the twenty-nine components assignable to one
or another of the eight loci are located in or on terraces.
The terrace positions and focal identifications of these components are shown in Figure 1. The sequence of loci as
indicated by terrace positions of these components also is
given. The other nine components are not considered in this
report, since they are not associated with terraces.
The Hot Springs focus is oldest; Jackson Narrows, Limestone Butte, and Sheps Canyon are of intermediate age;
Horsehead Creek a.nd Dry Creek are youngest. Cheyenne
Falls may fit into any of the three positions, and Red

102

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Canyon may fall into either of the last two~

Terrace posi-

tions alone do not permit chronological arrangement, with
respect to one another, of the three loci of intermediate age,
nor of the two youngest loci.*
The Hot Springs focus has two components (39FAll and
65), one occurring in the veneer of T-3, and one on the surface of T-3.

The former occurrence suggests that the focus

corresponds in age to the body of T-2.

No components of

any other loci have an occurrence as old or older than the
body of T-2. Hot Springs, therefore, may be considered the
oldest known focus.
The single component (39FA13) of the Cheyenne Falls
focus occurs on the surface of T-3, giving no clue as to
where the focus fits into the terrace or culture sequence.
The absence of Cheyenne Falls components on ].ower and
younger terraces may mean that these were still unformed
during existence of the focus, and that it is nearly as old
as the Hot Springs focus; but this absence may reflect other
factors, or merely inadequate investigation.
The Jackson Narrows focus has four components (39FA9,
38, 56, and 68), all of which occur in the veneer of T-2. This
suggests that Jackson Narrows corresponds in age to the
body of T-1. Since the focus appears to be younger than
Hot Springs and older than certain other loci, it may be
assigned to an intermediate position.
The Limestone Butte focus has three components (39FA10,
30, and 54), two occurring in the veneer of T-2, the other
in the body of T-1. These occurrences lend archeological
support to the geological theory that a veneer corresponds
in age mainly to the body of the next lower terrace. Like
Jackson Narrows, the Limestone Butte focus is assignable to
an intermediate position. Physiographic evidence does not
show which is the older.
*The more frequent occurrence of identifiable components in veneers than
in bodies probably reflects the fact that terraces were rarely suitable for extensive habitation until they were nearing completion.

Experiment in Relative Dating of Archeologica~ Remains

103

The Sheps Canyon focus has three comopents (39FA9",
l 0, and 14), two occurring in the veneer of T-2 and one on
the surface of T 2. Like ffackson Narrows and Limestone
Butte loci, Sheps Canyon is referable to an intermediate
position. The surface occurrence suggests that the Sheps
Canyon focus may be somewhat younger, but this cannot be
demonstrated physiographically.
The Horsehead Creek focus has two components* (39FA23,
Areas A and B), one occurring on the surface of T-1 and one
near the surface of T-O. This indicates that Horsehead
Creek corresponds in age to the last phase of the formation of the youngest terrace. A component of another focus
has a similar occurrence. Horsehead Creek, therefore, while
not necessarily the youngest known focus, may be considered one of the youngest.
The Red Canyon focus has three components (39FA9, 56,
and 68), all occurring on the surface of T-2. This indicates
that Red Canyon is younger than the veneer of T-2, but
fails to show whether it belongs in the intermediate or
youngest position.
The Dry Creek focus has two components (39FA45 and
48); one occurring on the surface of T-2 and one near the
surface of T-0. The latter occurrence indicates that Dry
Creek, like the Horsehead Creek focus, is one of the youngest known loci. Physiographic evidence fails to demonstrate
which is the younger.
Conclusions
In the Cheyenne River drainage of western South Dakota,
an archeological sequence based on stream terraces,
although generalized and incomplete, does not conflict with
one previously established on the basis of non-physiographic
evidence. On the contrary, it tends to bolster the previously
inferred sequence, and, in the absence of the latter, would
have served as a satisfactor~ substitute. It is evident that
stream terraces should be used in relative dating of cultural
*~lulti-component sites account fo~" th~s and other cases of duplicated site
*These were treated as a single component in Hughes. ]949.

104

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

remains wherever circumstances
permit.
Combined
archeological and geological research eventually may result
in accurate dates and widespread correlations for both remains and terraces.
References
Hughes, Jack T.
1949. "Investigations in Western South Dakota and
Northeastern Wyoming," American Antiquity, Vol. 14,
No. 4, pp. 266-277.
White~ Theodore E. and Hughes, Jack T.
N. D. "A preliminary Appraisal of the Physiographic
History of Horsehead Creek in the Vicinity of 39FA65,"
prepared by Missouri Valley Project, River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution, for Missouri River Basin
Recreation Survey, Region Two, National Park Service. (Mimeographed.)

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
ON THE VALIDITY OF TEPEXPAN MAN
The publication Tepexpan Man, by Helmut de Terra, Javier
mero, and T. D. Stewart (Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology, Number Eleven) has recently been distributed. In format and
quality this publication conforms to the high standards set by the
first ten of the Viking Fund series. The printing, cartography, and
illustrative figures are well done. The volume purports to summarize an all-out attack in a portion of the Valley of Mexico upon
the interlocking problems of geology, climate, paleontology, and
archaeology--problems which must be understood before the Ice
Age inhabitants (and cultures) of the Valley can be identified. For
professional anthopologists it is unnecessary to emphasize the importance of a research effort calculated to extend the known sequences of occupation in the Valley of Mexico backward to the
Pluvia] epochs. Inevitably such a project will be caught in the
the spotlight of critical scientific interest.
Chapter headings reflect the sound concepts around which the
report is organized. These are: Geographic Environment, Geologic
History of Tepexpan Region, Discovery of Tepexpan lYlan and Geologic Interpretation, Artifact Sites in Upper Pleistocene Alluvium,
Stratigraphic and Chronologic Key, Dating of Prehistoric Cultures,
Archaeological Data on Pre-ceramic Cultures, Pottery Sites in the
Tepexpan Region, the Carved Bone of Tepexpa~ (all the above by
de Terra), the Physical Aspects of Tepexpan Man (by Romero),
to which six appendices and a paper by T. D. Stewart, originally
given at the American Anthropological Assoc.~ation sessions of December 1947, are appended.
The study attempts to identify, correlat-~, and date the beach
lines, lake sediments, volcanic deposits, faunal and floral populations, and cultural debris of the Tepexpa.~ region. This I interpret as an attempt to understand the late glacial period ecology of
the Valley. After excavations in the old lake bed (which yielded
fossil mammoth--either Archidiscodon imperator or Parelephas
coIumbi--and Tepexpan man), a surface sur~,ey of open sites in the
vicinity, and an e:~amination of many exposed geologic sections,
de Terra establishes a series of successi~e human occupations which
he correlates with climatological and geological phenomena. On
pp. 52-53 his thoughts are summarized in two charts. He shows
San Juan (his earliest culture phase, which is immediately followed by Tepexpan man) as existing during the last pluvial.
logically this period is the Cochran~ period (or Wisconsin IV or
Long Draw) of the continent. The £epexpan skeleton is dated at
7,000 to 8,000 B. C. After the ret:eat of the glaciers, a culture
named "Chalco" is recognized, wh~h finally, after long duration,

106

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gives way to the Archaic of Mexico at some time late in the centuries before Christ. The few San Juan artifacts and the Chalco
materials are dated chiefly on the basis of their relationships to
beach lines and on the basis of inexpert typological sorting, of
what appear to have been selected artifact series. No evidence
that the cultures were observed in stratified relationships to each
other was mentioned. The entire section which deals with the
"cultures" leaves much to be desired. For example, the exploration of the evidence for equating the age of the carved elephant
tooth ~vith Tepexpan man and the labelling of the Tepexpan
culture as "Folsom-like" is questionable to the point of being
ridiculous. One particularly questions the typological soundness
of setting up a Tepexpan culture, inferentially associated with the
man, especially when the author himself confides that the Tepexpan culture is purely arbitrary.
In summary, this attempt to report a study, employing as it does
many kinds of data, is quite impressive and in part convincing.
In it we see exemplified the type of multifaceted analysis of the
paleo-Indian question which must be utilized if we are to solve
the questions s~rrounding our early cultures and their bearers.
Now I am impelled to move on to another matter of ~ critical
importance in the evaluation of the Tepexpan man himself.
(Omitted is a consideration of the vaguely defined cultures. These
and their sequence can be reobserved and checked in the field.)
In order to make rr.y point, it will be necessary to refer to earlier
releases bearing on ]:epexpan man. The present volume, which is
one of several repor~ on what might have been one of the most
important discoveries in the endless quest for reliable data b~aring
on Ice Age man in tae Western hemisphere, does not allay the
nagging doubt to whic]~. I have been increasingly subject regarding
the validity of the claims for antiquity for Tepexpan man.
I
have read, in sequence and with an ever-mounting uneasiness,
accounts of the Tepe×pa~ finds in Li]e Magazine, March 31, 1947,
pp. 109 ff; in American Antiquity, ~rol. 13, No. 1, July 1947; in the
American Anthropological Association News Bulletin, Vol. II, No. 3,
June 1948; in American A~iquity, Vol. 14, No. I, July 1948; Amer-.
ican Anthropological Association News Bulletin, Vol. II, No. 4, September 1948; and finally t~2s beautifully printed volume bearing
the Viking Fund seal.
In .~ddition I listened to Dr. de Terra’s
address at Santa Fe, New ~/fexico, during the AA/k sessions in
December 1947. I presumed then that the anthropological profession had at its disposal all ~he data likely ever to be available
regarding the find.
Since the record is compleX, and legitimate.questions remain
unanswered, these paragraphs are written as a commentary on

News Notes and Editorials

both field and reporting techniques.

107

(In the AAA News Bulletin,

Vol. 3, No. 1) February 1949, p. 18, there was an article by Glenn
Black, entitled "Tepexpan Man: a Critique of Method", published
shortly after this review was written. Black’s article described in
some detail the glsring technical incompetencies of the Tepexpan
man operations as revealed by photographs.

Inasmuch as he has

competently reviewed many details, I have greatly condensed my
statements regarding techniques.
As a practitioner of the simple, long used techniques of field
archaeology, I am convinced that a!l manipulations of archaeologically derived data are valid only insofar as the data recovered are
accurate. It seems axiomatic that uncontrolled primary data are
likely to ~,ield questionable conclusions. Unfortunately, the record
of the recovery of Tepexpan man seems to indicate little control.
For example, in the latest publication,~ we are flatly told on page
39 that "the man had fallen face down," and again on page 91
there is figure 16 showing a skull face down labelled "Skeleton in
situa, sketch showing . . . the original position of the skull." But
plates 22 and 23 both show the staring skull nested in a basin
scooped from the surrounding clods, resting firmly on its foramen
magunum! However, the capiton for plate 22 asserts that the
skull has been moved from its original position tO obtain a better
photo. If the skull is not in situ, why leave it in the hole? But
in contrast, in a preliminary reportz we read or/page 41 that "the
skeletal remains . . . suggest Aitalics ~nineQ tha~ the body was embedded face down." Was it or was it not face down? Finally, we
are told3 on page 37 that many of the body bones were found a
month after the original discovery by sifting the spoil dirt. Why
do these uncertainties exist; particularly if " ... one of the workmen pointed to a dark roundish object which had been left untouched in the muck formation. Engineer Arellano of the Instituto
Nacional de Geologiao who had accompanied me that morning to
assist in disbursement of the workers, witnessed my digging the
human skull out of the clay where it must have seen the last light
of day many thousands of years ago. It lay 48 inches below the
surface and 14 inches beneath the caliche. The skull was then
left at the same spot for witnesses to study its original stratigraphic
position."4 Nowhere is there a photograph of the skeleton or
skull as purportedly discovered. Thus, despite the last quotation
above, I feel justified in asking, "What was the original position
of the skeleton and who saw it that way?"

1.
2.
~
~[

de
de
de
de

Terra,
Terra.
Terra,
Terra,

Romero, and Stewart, 1949, p. 39.
1947, p. 41.
1947, p. 37.
1947, I~..~6.

108

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

It is stated that the body lay 109 cm. from the present surface.
It lay in muck of pluvial origin, over which, supposedly, lay a 4
inch band of caliche, the latter covered with recent sediments. If
the data as to the original position of the skeleton are uncertain,
can we couple this fact with the crude and uncontrolled digging
and the lack of any good photographs recording unbroken strata
above the burial and ask whether there is any doubt as to the
original relation of the man to the muck? And more particularly,
was the Caliche continuous directly above the skeleton? Plate 22
shows the skull very close to the pit wall, and there appear to be
unbroken bands of soil in the pit wall just behind it. But we have
already learned from the cap~ion of the plate that the skull had
been moved for photography.
Therefore, its photographically
implied proximity to the evidently unbroken natural soil profile
(a proximity which would have helped argue against an intrusive
pit from above the caliche) is completely unvalidated. At such a
shallow depth the possibility of an intrusion is insistent. One’s
fears are not allayed by the explanation that "root canals were
found to penetrate the skull cavity uadisturbed from the caliche
downward..."~ As an explanation, this is not overwhelmingly
convincing. Generally, root canals in the soil within the skull
would argtm for, rather than against, a break in the ovelying
caliche. Roots and root channels in the soil inside skulls of much
less age than is claimed for Tepexpan have been found. Is it not
more reasonable to suppose that the roots of modern plants would
seek and find an opening in the impervious caliche in order to tap
the resources of the rich moisture~laden muck of the old swamp?
The possibility of intrusion in such an important find at a shallow
depth must be forever ruled out; in this case the data do not allow
us to be certain.
But why continue? In the face of many discrepancies, I am
constrained to make the guess that the excavation was done by an
inexperienced crew of workmen, without supervision, and that
neither de Terra nor his associates saw the excavation at the
critical point when an intrusive pit from the surface through the
caIiche either could have been observed or definitely ruled out,
nor did they observe the skeleton at the time of discovery by workmen. In fact, on page 37 we read that "[it was] ... suspected that
some fragments of the skeleton . . . had been removed by the
workmen while digging aga’.,nst my authorization." When was
this unauthorized digging done--before or after the skull was first
seen by de Terra?

2.

de Ter~’a,

]947.

Ioc. cit.

News Notes and Editorials

109

As for the reporting itself, the volume is characterized by an
all-pervasive vagueness regarding the raw detailed facts surrounding the skeletal find.

Good examples may be seen on pages 36

and 39. The vagueness of statement and the absence of data in
the critical points seems to be a sort of verbal magic used in lieu
of observed facts. Because of the uncertainty of primary data,
the authors of the appendices apparently have been forced to echo
the basic vagueness, although in a critical find of this nature
great caution is certainly appropriate.

According to physical

anthropological evidence, the fossil man in question, to no one’s
surprise, could be either modern or ancient. So we are forced to
rely for dating on the geological evidence, and this is not definitely
set forth. In general the report seems to be written in an attempt
to obscure or eradicate the thought that the entire excavation operation was bumbling and inept. It seems to be another case of
excavation: by individuals either untrained in, or unwilling to
follow, the long-established observational and control techniques
generally employed by competent archaeologists in excavation
work. And as previously mentioned, the text indicates uncertainty
and inexperience when the author deals with the artifact assemblages recovered in the Tepexpan area. One has the impression that he is completely at sea when using the concepts
and procedures employed in typological study: typology, of course,
if unsupported by other evidence, is not the archaeologist’s strongest inferential tool.
It will be argued that it is easy to criticize another’s work, or
that hindsight is better than foresight. The answer is simply that
the use of a normally cautious approach to a suspect area, which
in the excavator’s mind. was laden with scientific potency, is not an
unreasonable thing to expect of an experienced student of man,
climate, and culture. Certainly, a better digging job would have
made unnecessary many circumlocutions found in the study.
In summary, then, I point out (1) that .the Tepexpan man find
was not made by trained observers in a controlled situation, (2)
that the possibility of intrusion is strong, (3) an evasive quality
in the reporting, and (4) what seems to be an attempt to cover up
errors of field judgment which resulted in loss or critical data.
It seems a pity that the considerable expenditures involved on a
long term project of this scope and importance should result in
incomplete data, unsatisfactorily reported.
I am unable to determine whether the author’s inadequate reporting is intentionally
obscure or whether it is due to unfamiliarity with the standards
which American archaeologist attempt to achieve.

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

In conclusion, I do-.not, on any grounds, deny the antiquity of
Tepexpan man. I do not deny that any or all of the graphic, ~or
verbal, or inferential proof may indeed be true. But based entirely
on the nature of the evidence and the manner of presentation in the
report, I do strongly doubt it.

It would have been easier for all

concerned if the author had detailed the exact facts of the find,
and set out any gaps in his controls. A full recital of .the facts,
including uncertainties, followed by inferential evidence, would
have been more convincing. As things now stand, the surface
survey of the Tepexpan area, the correlations of geological, climatological, geographical, paleontological, and cultural data, the
speculations about intra-valley relationships, and so on, may be
valid and of continuing use to later students. But Tepexpan man
himself should perforce be added to the list of finds of putative
but unproved antiquity.
JESSE D. JENNINGS,
Department of Anthropology,
University of Utah.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
de Terra, Helmut
1947. "Preliminary Note on the Discovery of Fossil Man at
Tepexpan in the Valley of Mexico," American Antiquity, Vol.
XIII, No. 1, pp. 40-44.
de Terra, Helmut; Javier Romero; and T. D. Stewart
1949. "Tepexpan Man," Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology, Number Eleven.

CLEAR FORK POINTS
Dear Mr. Holden:

Among the artifacts that you sent to Mr. Krieger some weeks
ago was the point found with the elephant remains about which
we corresponded earlier. Krieger called my attention to this
fact, and I took the liberty of making a drawing of the point at
that time. Krieger showed me also one other point in the lot that
seemed to stand out from others, and while our artist was on the
job, I had made a drawing of this point also. Feeling sure that
sooner or later you would yourself have occasion to use drawings

News Notes and Editorials

111

of these points, I requested the artist to make an extra drawing of
each of these for you, which I am sending herewith.
I am glad to have had this opportunity of making the drawing
of the point found with the elephant remains. With best wishes,
Very sincerely yours,
E. H. SELLARDS

4-7-

d.7

0

FIGURE 2,
Two artifacts from the Lower Clear Fork Silt.
No. 47--73-311: "Found embedded in lower Clear Fork silt at McLean
site almost in contact wlth two teeth of mammoth and near its bones. Witnessed by :Dr. Kirk Bryan, Samuel Vaughn, and Dr: Cyrus N. Ray.
No. 47--70: "Found embedded in Lower Clear Fork silt, 1938. Witnessed
bY Ray, Bryan, and Vaughn. See 1938 Sci. l~Iag. A.AoA.S."

BOOK REVIEWS
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, H. Perry
Newell and Alex D. Krieger.

Appendix, "Maize from the Davis

Site: Its Nature and Interpretation," by Volney H. Jones.

Memoirs

of the Society for American Archaeology, Number 5, lYlenasha,
Wis., 1949. XV - 255 pp., 66 figs., 20 tables.

This publication continues the valuable studies by Krieger and
his co-workers which are delineating the cultures of the "Caddoan Area," especially during the earlier or Gibson Aspect, as
distinguished from the protohistoric and contact cultures of the
Fulton Aspect, which are universally accepted as Caddoan in
origin.
The Davis site, which lies on the second terrace of the Neches
River near Alto in Cherokee County, Texas, was partially excavated
as a W. P. A.--University of Texas project in 1939-1941, under the
direction of Perry Newell. I-Ie spent the following year in study of
the materials and preparation of the report of excavations, which
forms Part I of this volume. After Newell’s tragic death in 1946,
Krieger continued the analysis and interpretations, on which they
had previously collaborated, presenting them herein as Part II.
In the Appendix, Volney H. Jones analyzes the maize remains from
the site. The authors have done a superb job of reporting on this
site, which assumes a key position in the area, regardless of any
questions which may arise from the interpretations.
In Par~ I Newell described the site and its environment within
the forest zone of Central East Texas. Careful historical research,
as well as results of the excavations, eliminates the idea that this site
marks the location of an historic Neches Indian Village and an early
Spanish mission established in 1680 among these Indians.
Details of the excavations reveal the meticulous care with which
Newell worked, attested also by a number of excellent photographs.
Nearly 600 10-foot sections of village area were removed by 5-inch
levels and about half of a large mound, approximately 150 by 250
feet in diameters and 16 feet high, was removed by sections traversing the entire mound in 10-foot widths and 5-foot vertical walls.
The mound, one of three on the site, was L-shaped and constructed
of village soils, no borrow pits being in evidence. Newell considered the L shape to have resulted from the incorporation of two
original mounds into one larger tumulus, or possibly from a watercut gully, partially filled; Krieger favors the first interpretation.
The village level extended uninterruptedly under the mound, which
Newell states (Fig.. 6) consisted of a primary and secondary stage.
Seven thousand, eight hundred forty-five specimens were catalogued, of which 11,247 were in the primary mound, 16,045 in the

Book Reviews

113

secondary mound and 70,553 in the village area. Ninety eight per
cent of these were potsherds.
Of the 34 house outlines wholly or partially uncovered, 4 were
atop the primary mound, 7 unquestionably in the submound village
level and the remainder were beneath the mound wash or in the
surrounding village. The structures generally lacked projecting
or recognizable entranceways, r~gularly-spaced roof supports or
prepared floors. Posts were usually set separately, although a few
sections of wall trenches were found; central firebeds were usually
present and placed over a covered post mold (suggesting a center
post used in construction and later removed, as described among
the historic Tejas). Several sub-mound buildings were unique
in having large oval cache-pits in their floors. On the primary
platform within the mound there was evidence of a shift from
circular structures to squared, with rounded corners. Krieger
attributes this to influence from Spiro, a suggestion which is given
weight by the presence of projecting entranceways from two presumably ceremonial structures which seem to equate temporarily
with the primary mound houses. One of these atypical structures,
a "maze" with the appearance of two double rows of entrance
posts (Figs. 20-21), may suggest to some the possibility of two
separate houses with irregular outlines, but this reviewer visited
the site while this feature was exposed, observed the extreme care
which Newell devoted to its details and is disposed to accept the
conclusions of the authors that it was an unusual ceremonial
building.
An .areawide comparison of house types, with conclusions as to
derivation of constructional features, is still difficult because of
inadequate excavation, although more information is available
than in 1940 when I tentatively reviewed the subject. Among
Gibson Aspect cultures, the Alto Focus demonstrates the transition
from circular buildings to squared houses, with details as noted
above. In the Spira area, rectangular and square houses with projecting entranceways and regularly space roof supports are characteristic of Spiro II, with a similar pattern continuing into the McCurtin Focus (Fulton Aspect). House types are not established for
the Gahagan Focus. At the Sanders site floor plans were described
as three walls outlined by post molds, with the fourth side open,
but their specific relationship to the Sanders Focus is not established. Among Haley Focus sites, the premound I-Ialey component
at the ttatchel site had a large circular structure without recognizable entrance; later Texarkana Focus (Fulton Aspect) houses at
this site were circular with projecting entrances. The premound
Haley component at Belcher had a rectangular house with wall
trenches, rounded corners and projecting entrance; it was followed by an oval structure which had Bossier Focus (transitional)

114

Tezas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sherds in association; the higher Belcher Focus (Fulton Aspect)
levels had circular houses with projecting entrances, later a welldefined opening without projecting entrance. Sites at Ozan I,
Washington and Mineral Springs, apparently representing ttaley
and Spiro II Foci, presented a variety of house shapes, but more frequently are described as square or rectangular, with or without
rounded corners and well-defined or projecting entrances. In the
historic contact period, all Caddoan houses are described or illustrated as round or oval, without projecting entrances.
In Part II, Krieger first analyzes the physical stratification of the
site, establishing 11 "zones" of mound construction and 4 for the
field. These are next grouped into a sequence of cultural stratigraphy by analysis of cultural remains, largely pottery, establishing
three sequent ’~hases" of culture change for the mound, which
was borne out by similar study of materials from the field. As
nearly as possible, house outlines are assigned to the phases, the
majority having evident or apparent association with Phase I. One
hesitates to agree that this fact connotes a markedly longer habitation on the site in the premound or Phase I period than after
mound construction began, especially since none of the village level
structures are assigned to Phase III. As mound construction proceeded, houses may well have been placed further away, beyond
the limits of the excavation. It is evident, also, that the authors
did not attach the same significance to the lensing noted in the
primary mound, which Newell seemed to consider a construction
method of little temporal significance, whereas Krieger includes
Zones 2 to 5 in Phase I, speaking of them as "four small mounds",
and also speaks of Zone 6 as the first flat-topped mound, probably
built and used as a temple mound.
Despite minor evidences of cultural stratigraphy, artifact study
showed that the site was occupied throughout all phases by the
same cultural group. Pottery analysis was based on 11,840 sherds
of the 96,000 total, eliminating body sherds and non-distinctive
fragments; matching and grouping of sherds further reduced the
total to approximately 5,920 vessels. Krieger considers this method
to be more reliable, especially since previous experience demonstrated marked, differences between percentages calculated from
total sherds and from actual vessels after sherd matching. Sequential studies, relating to source from the various zones and
phases, were then made of resident and presumed trade or foreign
types, after a prolonged study of materials in comparison with potteries throughout the "Caddoan Area," adjoining areas and even
very distant cultures. From original 17 tentative types worked
out by Newell, a process of combination of variants and elimination of types based on body sherds enabled Krieger to evolve 7
major and 2 minor types of resident pottery.
Typology was

Book Reviews

115

achieved necessarily on the basis of decorative technic and design
motifs, with some assistance from vessel shapes, because of the
conistent ceramic tradition of clay tempering supplemented often
with pulverized vegetal material.
The engraved series included
Holly and Hickory Fine Engraved, which differed chiefly in that
the latter had wider spacing of lines and simplified designs. Holly
Fine Engraved is a beautiful ware, with highly polished black
surfaces cut through by fine engraving and excised spaces, forming complex curvilinear and straight line patterns on the larger
vessels, often with pigment impressed into the design elements.
Carinated bowls and tapered-spout bottles were the predominant
vessel forms. This type was found through all phases of the excavations and additionally seems to be the marker type throughout
the "Caddoan Area" for the earliest known engraved ware and
probably the first bottle form in the area (possibly the first bottle
for the entire United States). Holly and Hickory Engraved appear
also at Crenshaw and Gahagan, where this reviewer considers them
to be resident types, not trade items as suggested by Krieger. The
distinctive features of these engraved wares, together with a
number of traits suggestive of Meso-American influence which appeared in the Caddoan Area during and after the Gibson period,
led Krieger to search as far as the Guatemalan highlands for
relationships. The nearest counterpart for the fine line engraved,
polished black Davis wares appears with terraced clay mounds in
the Miraflores phase of the Highlands and, in the valley of Mexico,
the bottle form appears in the same general Formative period.
The suggestion of a possible source from the Guatemalan Highlands as early as 300-500 A. D. appears startling at first, but tentative Carbon 14 datings and other researches give the impression
tha~ previous Southeastern chronologies are too conservative; the
space factor also is more acceptable when one examines the tradition of tremendous cross-county travel and trading exhibited
by some of the Gibson Aspect peoples (Spiro, Gahagan), exceeded
only by the Ohio Hopewell.
The incised and punctated wares at the Davis site follow to a
considerable degree the ceramic traditions of the lower Mississippi
valley and Krieger points out numerous relationships with potteries
to the east and north of the Davis site. Despite certain changes
occurring during the later phases--the introduction of bone temper,
scroll motifs, lighter surface color, cruder decoration technic-¯ all types remain remarkably stable. One of the most controversial
points concerning the interpretation of ceramics in this report relates to evidences adduced by Krieger to suggest that resident wares
anteceded presumed trade sherds of the Marksville-TroyvilleColes Creek sequence and were contemporaneous with sand-tempered pottery resembling Tchefuncte and Pickwick Basin types.
Conclusions based on placement of sherds included in the mound

116

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

fill must be indefinite because the method of mound construction
from village soil made the inclusion of artifacts from prior habitation dependent more on the particular area and depth from which
the soil was taken than on the time at which this was done. However, the chronological and correlative possibilities (p. 223, Fig 66)
are challenging toward ~uture research.
Space does not permit full discussion of other artifacts. Ear
spools, long-stemmed pottery pipes and white sandstone hones are
consistent with these traits in other Gibson cultures; flat adzes
and "greenstone" petaloid celts are represented. Projectiles include "arrow" points, chiefly Alba Barbed, also the predominant
projectile at Gahagan, and Hayes Barbed, which is the type point
for Haley Focus; larger or "dart" points, including several types
which evidently carried over from late Archaic or preceramic
cultures. A shift from dart to arrow points is indicated in the
three phases, although both types are present throughout. The
finding of a fragment of fluted point, two stone bowl fragments
and a clay ball of the Poverty Point type indicate intermittent usage
of this site in prepottery times.
The relationships of the Alto Focus with other Gibson Aspect
loci, their correlation with culture horizons of the Eastern United
States, and possible affiliations wih Middle American cultures
are discussed fully. Krieger’~ final conclusion that the culture represented in Phase I of the Davis site was an amalgamation of Middle American and Eastern United States ~lements, dating "somewhere around 500 A. D., if not earlier" receives interesting support
from the independent conclusion arrived at by Volney Jones from
a study of the maize remains, reported in ~he appendix. The
Davis corn fits the category of Northern Flint corn, which falls
in the Eastern Complex, as distinguished from the HohokamBasketmaker Complex and the Mexican Complex. Jones states
that Eastern Complex corn was derived from Guatemala, that the
Davis site is its further southwest occurrence, and that the Alto
Focus can be considered as one of the earliest recipients of this
corn in the United States area, probably by 700 A. D.
CLARENCE H. WEBB.
1560 Line Avenue, Shreveport, Louisiana.

Early Man in the New World. By Kenneth Macgowan, with
drawings by Campbell Grant.
The MacMillan Company, New
York, 1950. 260 pages, numerous figures and maps. $5.00.

This new book must be brought to the attention of all archaeologists, amateurs as well as professionals. For the first time, a

Book Reviews

117

reliable book has been written which weaves together the evidence of archaeology and geology on the early appearance of human beings in America, who they were, whence they came and
when, and how their cultures developed, with possible later influences from the civilizations of the Old World.
I say "reliable book" because this is not the first attempt at this
subject. However, in my opinion the previous efforts have been
either very technical and dry on the one hand, or filled with wild
and personal guesswork on the other. Macgowan has succeeded
in reducing the vast complexities to comprehension through an
astonishing knowledge of the scientific literature, tempered with
good judgment, and writing in a simple straightforward language
which any educated reader can follow. An "amateur" himself,
and already famous as a producer of plays and motion pictures,
DIacgowan has provided a distinct service to the professions of
anthropology and archaeology.
There are confusions, to be sure. Much of Chapter 9 (Pygmies,
Australoids, and Negroids---Before Indians?), will sound like hopeless gibberish to ~he un~rained. This is not Macgowan’s fault at
all, but entirely that of the renowned physical anthropologists
whom he quotes. They have invented hopeless terms for the
physical features of the earliest Americans, or used terms taken
from the Old World tO suggest certain likenesses of face, nose,
skull, ~tc., all of which fails them in trying to draw a clear
picture of the American natives in their many varieties or "races."
Only the comparatively late arrivals into the New World can
safely be compared with "Mongols"; the first ones are so divergent
from Mongoloids that they may represent entirely different races
of mankind--just what, is far from clear, as Macgowan emphasizes.
On the other hand, numerous discoveries of ancient human
remains, artifacts, chipping techniques, the causes of the extinction
of various Pleistocene animals, the origins of agriculture, and so
on are lucidly discussed, lYlacgowan has no axe to grind and no
particular theory to "prove."
He simply aims to bring
together a host of ideas from a great many sources, enabling the
reader to comprehend what the problems are. The final chapter
is characteristic of his attitude, bei~.g entitled "Puzzles, Problems,
and Half-Answers." The professional anthropologist will be interested in his observations on parallels between the Old and New
Worlds, all of Which is fresh and up-to-date in a constantly changing
picture.
ALEX D. KRIEGER.
Anthropology Department,
University of Texas, Austin.

118

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER
OF THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Report for the twenty-second year from the annual meeting,
at Alpine May 3, 1949, to August 31, 1950.
RECEIPTS
Balance on May 3, 1949 .................................................................... $ 563.49
Collected on 1946 dues ....................................................................

3.00

Collected on 1948 dues ....................................................................

15.00

Collected on 1949 dues ...................................................................

327.00

Collected on 1950 dues ...................................................................

24.00

Collected on sale of Bulletins ........................................................
65 @ $3.00 each,

195.00

TOTAL ......................................................................................... $1127.49
DISBURSEMENTS
Southwestern Engraving Co., Dallas, Texas, for
24 engravings for Vol. 29 ........................................................ $ 232.69
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., for
printing Vol. 20 ........................................................................

429.00

Postage .................................................................................................

]5.00

TOTAL ........................................................................................ $

676.69

Balance on deposit in First National Bank,
Lubbock, Texas, on August 31, 1950 ................................ $
ERNEST WALLACE,
Secretary-Treasurer.

450.80

Membership List 1949-50

119

MEMBERSHIP LIST 1949-50
HONORARY MEMBERSHIP
Albert G. Ingalls, Sclenti~ic A~nerican Magazine,
.............................................................................. New York City, N. Y.
MEMBERS
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co ................................. Abilene, Texas
E. T. Adams ...................................................................... Glen Rose, Texas
A & H Society, Box 791 ..................................................... Roswell, N. M.
American Museum of Natural Histor~............ New York City, N. Y.
American Philosophical Society ................................ Philadelphia 6, Pa.
Max W. Ball, 1648 Foxhall Road, N. W .................Washington 17, D. C.
D. A. Bandeen, West Texas Chamber of Commerce....Abilene, Texas
Baylor University Library .................................................... Waco, Texas
¯ Dr. Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma ................ Norman, Okla.
G. C. Benson, Box 381 ......................................................... Whitney, Texas
Joe Benton ............................................................................... Nocona, Texas
J. S. Bridwell, Bridwell Oil Co ............................. Wichita Falls, Texas
W. P. Brennan ............................................................... Crystal City, Texas
Richmond L. Bronaugh, Baylor University........................ Waco, Texas
Mrs. Charles Brower (Hall Ranch) ............. Richland Springs, Texas
Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institute,
.......................................................................................... Washington, D. C,
C. M. Caldwell ...................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, University of Texas ......................... Austin, Texas
Mrs. Win. H. Campbell, Box 116, Kings Canyon Road,
..: ..........................................................: .......................... Carson City, Nev.
Sam Chamberlain ................................................................. Refugio, Texas
Chicago Natural History Museum, Roosevelt Road and
............................................................ Lakeshore Drive, Chicago 5, Ill.
Cleveland Public Library. .............................................. Cleveland, Ohio
Columbia University Library ................................ New York City, N. Y.
Corpus Christi City Public Library .................... Corpus Christi, Texas
Col. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road ................ San Antonio, Texas
Dallas Public Library ............................................................ Dallas, Texas
E. C. de Montel, 1000 National Bldg...................... Wichita Falls, Texas
Frederic H. Douglas, Denver Art Museum, 1300 Logan St.,
............................................................................................ Denver 3, Colo.
Dr. C. D. Eaves, Texas Technological College ............ Lubbock, Texas
Helen S. Farrington, E1 Paso Public Library ................ E1 Paso, Texas
Field Museum of Natural Hi.story ........................................ Chicago, Ill
W. S. Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick Drilling Co ......... Corpus Christi, Texas
M. F. Foote, 6110 Mimosa Lane ............................................ Dallas, Texas
R. E. Forrester ............................................................................ Moran, Texas
W. S. ~ulton........................................................................ Dragoon, Arizona
Harold S. G1adwin, 584 Valley Road .................... Santa Barbara, Calif.
Frank Grimes .......................................................................... Abilene, Texas

120

Texas Archeological and Paleon$ological Society

Hardin-Simmons Library........................................... Abilene, Texas
R. K. Harris, 9024 San Fernando Way_ .................... _Dallas 18, Texas
Dr. J. E. Hawkins, Baylor University............................. Waco, Texas
Frank H. Hayne, Texas Technological College ............ Lubbock, Texas
Dr. Frank C. Hibbon, 3000 Campus Blvd. .......... Albuquerque, N. M.
Dr. T. L. Hodges ...................................... : ................. Bismark, Ark.
Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological College ......... Lubbock, Texas
Houston Public Library. ......................................... Houston, Texas
Institute Panamericano de Geografia e Historia, 192 Avenida
.................. del Observatorio, Tacubaya, D F., Republica Mexicana
Illinois State Museum ............................................... Springfield, Ill.
A. T. Jackson, 508 E. 46th Street ....................................... Austin, Texas
Henry James ............................................................. Abilene, Texas
Joint University Libraries ................................ Nashville 4, Tenn.
Johns Hopkins University Library .......................... Baltimore 18, Md.
Percy Jones, Box 176 .................................................. Abilene, Texas
L. G. Kammerdiener ........................................................ Lubbock, Texas
Harold M. Kautz, 3253 Sondra Drive ........................ Fort Worth, Texas
Dr. J. Charles Kelley, University of Texas .................. Austin, Texas
Mrs. Forrest Kirkiand, 911 S. Van Buren Avenue ........ Dallas 8, Texas
Dr. Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas ...................... Austin, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology .......................................... Santa Fe, N. M.
Judge Harry J. Lemley ............................................................. Hope, Ark.
Eli Lilly, 5807 Sunset Lane ..................................... Indianapolis, Ind.
Louisiana State University General Library_ .......... Baton Rouge, La.
Kenneth MacGowan, 10727 LeConte Avenue ........ Los Angeles, Calif.
Dr. J. G. McAllister, University of Texas ........................ Austin, Texas
A. T. McDannald, Box 2972 .............................................. Houston, Texas
E. A. McIlhenny....................................................................... (Deceased)
McMurry College ..................................................... Abilene, Texas
Metropolitan Museum of Art Library, Fifth Ave. and 82nd St.,
.................................................................. New York 28, N. Y.
Mrs. Glen E. Moore, 2515 E. Yandell ............................ E1 Paso, Texas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation,
Huntington Free Library ................... New York City, N. Y.
Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place ............................. Chicago, Ill
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and
42nd Streets ..................................................... New York City, N. Y.
Northwestern University Library ................................. Evanston, Ill
Ohio University Library .................................................. Athens, Ohio
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University .............................................. Cambridge, Mass.
W. M. Pearce, Texas Technological College ........... Lubbock, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept. of American Archaeology._..Andover, Mass.
Mrs. Jean W. Quinn, Texas Technological College....Lubbock, Texas
L. E. Rawalt, 725 Post St ....................................... Corpus Christi, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 ................................................... Abilene, Texas
J. Henry Ray, 2130 Fannin St ....................................... Vernon, Texas

121
Dr. Erik K. Reed, 288 Griffin St .................................. Santa Fe, N. M.
P. M. Rice............................................................. Hamilton, Texas
Rice Institute Library.......................................... Houston, Texas
Dr. R. N. Richardson, Hardin-Simmons University__Abilene, Texas
Thomas E. Roberts............................................... Abilene, Texas
Rosenberg Library. ............................................... Galveston, Texas
San Antonio Public Library..... San Antonio, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Parl~......... San Diego, Calif.
San Jaeinto Museum of History Associatdon ....... San Jacinto, Texas
E. B. Sayles, Arizona State Museum_ .........................Tucson, Arizona
Henry Sayles, Jr...............................................Abilene, Texas
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University..... Dallas, Texas
Judge O. L. Sims ................................................. Paint Rock, Texas
Dr. R. E. Smallwood, 518 Holly St .............................. Fayetteville, Ark.
Prof. Victor J. Smith, Sul Ross College ....................... .Alpine, Texas
Smithsonian Institution_ ...........................................Washington, D. C.
Society des Americanistes, Musse de L’ Homme,
Palis de’Chaillot ................................................... Paris, France
F. J. Soday, 1124 West Elm Street ............................ E1 Dorado, Ark.
Southern Methodist University Library....................... Dallas, Texas
Southwest Museum Library, Highland Park 42....Los Angeles, Calif.
Southwest Texas Museum Association ........................ Uvalde, Texas
Stephen F. Austin State Teachers’ College
Library............................................................ _Nacogdoches, Texas
R. L. Stepheuson, P. O. Box 4066 .................................... Austin, Texas
Floyd V. Studer, 636 Amarillo Bldg ............................. Amarillo, Texas
Tyrell Public Library.................................................. Beaumont, Texas
H. C. Taylor, Jr., University of Texas.............................. Austin, Texas
Walter W. Taylor, Jr., 711 Camino del Monte Sol........ Santa Fe, N. M.
Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College
Library............................................................... College Station, Texas
Texas State Library, Capitol Building .......................... Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library_ ........................... Lubbock, Texas
Texas Western College ........................................................ E1 Paso, Texas
Thomas Gilcrease Foundation ............................................... Tulsa, Okla.
Wi]_lis G. Tilton, 1615 W. 21 ..............................................Topeka, Kans.
Tyrell Public Library................................................ Beaumont, Texas
University Museum Library, Univ. of Penn.,
33rd and Spruce ........................................................ Philadelphia 4, Pa.
University of Arizona Library ........................................ Tucson, Arizona
University of Arkansas Library................................. Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library ..................................... Berkeley, Calif
University of California at Los Angeles .................. Los Angeles, Calif.
University of Chicago Library .............................................. Chicago, Ill.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library........................ Denver, Colo.
University of Illinois Library ................................................. Urbana, I!l.
University of Kansas Library....................................... Lawrence, Kans.
University of Michigan Library ................................. Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Nebraska Library ......................................... Lincoln, Neb.

122

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

University of New Mexico Library ........................ Albuquerque, N. M.
University of Oklahoma Library ...................................... Norman, Okla.
University of Texas Library .......................................... Austin, Texas
University of Utah Library. .......................Salt Lake City 1, Utah
Mrs. W. C. Vernon, Texas Technological College ....... .Lubbock, Texas
Waco Public Library ..........................................................Waco, Texas
Dr. Ernest Wallace, Texas Technological College._Lubbock, Texas
P. H. Walser, 1102 N. 1st St ................................................Temple, Texas
Frank H. Watt, Box 1176............................................. Waco, Texas
Dr. Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons University............ Abilene, Texas
William C. Watts, 2111 23rd Street .............................. Lubbock, Texas
Harry E. Weaver, R. R. Robert Lee ........................... San Angelo, Texas
Dr. C. H. Webb, Children’s Clinic .................................... Shreveport, La.
Joe Ben Wheat, University of Arizona ........................Tucson, Arizona
Winkler County Free Library........................................... Kermit, Texas
A. H. ’Witte ......................................................................... Henrietta, Texas
Witte Museum ............................................................. San Antonio, Texas
R. B. Worthington, 4216 Walker Ave ............................. Houston, Texas
Bill Wright, 1226 Sylvan Drive.......... : ........................ Abilene, Texas
Yale University Library........................................ New Haven, Conn.

BULLETIN
OF THE

~exa~ Ar~heologi~al a~

VOLUME TWENTY-TWO
1951

Published
Socie,y at
Lubbock,
Texas

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCI ETrY

PRINTE~D

IN

THE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

BULLETIN
of the

exas Arrheologira! ani
aleonlologira!
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology.
By Robert E. Bell and David A. Baerreis ........................

7

2. Mastodon, Mammoth, and Man in America.
By Hugo Gross ................................................................... 101
3. A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated
in Shackelford County, Texas.
By Robert E. Forrester, Jr ................................................ 132
4. An Archaeological Cache from Hueco Basin, Texas.
By Mrs. Glen E. Moore and Mrs. Joe Ben Wheat ......... 144
5. Archaeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma.
By Harold D. Brighton ....................................................... 164
6. The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma.
By Art Gallaher ................................................................. 188
7. Some New Aspects of the Tepexpan Man Case.
By A. R. V. Arellano .......................................................... 217
8. News Notes and Editorials ...................................... 227
9. Report of the Secretary-Treasurer ................................ 230
10. Membership List .................................................................. 231
Vol. 22, 1951

Price $5.00

Lubbock, Texas

OFFICERS
O. L. SIMs, Paint Rock, President
Abilene, President Emeritus

CYRUS N. RAY,

ROBERT E. BELL,

Norman, Okla., Active Vice-President

EP~ES~: WAL~.~CE, Lubbock, Secretary-Treasurer
W. C.

HOLDEN,

Lubbock, Editor of Publications

DIRECTORS
In Addition to the Above
T. N. Campbell, Austin

Col. M. L. Crimmins, San Antonio

C. Boone McClure, Canyon

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
E. H. Sellards, Austin

Floyd V. Studer, Amarillo

R. K. Harris, Dallas

Robert L. Stephenson, Austin

Mrs. Glen E. Moore, E1 Paso

Otto O. Watts, Abilene

Erik K. Reed, Santa Fe

Rupert N. Richardson, Abilene

TRUSTEES
Glen L. Evans, Austin
Victor Smith, Alpine

Karl Schmitt, Norman, Okla.
Harry E. Weaver, San Angelo

Alex D. Krieger, Austin

J. Henry Ray, Vernon

Roy H. Reinhart, Canyon

Mrs. Forest Kirkland, Dallas

The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking; for the study of the
history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas;
for the encouragement of the proper
collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums and their
study and classification and the publication of the results of the researches
incident thereto.
The BULLETIN is published annually
for distribution to members of the society. Opinions expressed herein are
those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent views of the society or
the editorial staff.

A SURVEY OF OKLAHOMA ARCHAEOLOGY
ROBERT E. BELL

and DAWD A.

BAER!~EI8

INTRODUCTION
The prehistory of Oklahoma is not well represented in
the archaeological literature, and much of the published information is not readily accessible. Therefore, it seems desirable to bring together in a summary fashion the information available about the various archaeological manifestations found within the state. A portion of the following
formation is based upon published accounts by other individuals while other sections of the text present new material
previously unpublished. Photographs have been carefully
selected to illustrate what are believed to be typical artifacts
for the cultures concerned.l For the most part, these specimens have not been illustrated elsewhere, and they will serve
to compensate for the limitations in descriptive information.
This synoptic survey of Oklahoma archaeology is based
upon the present status of research. In some cases, earlier
concepts have been accepted; in others, some questions have
been raised, and in a few instances new interpretations are
hereby offered. Irregardless of the ultimate validity of the
cultural sequence and interrelationships, it is deemed worth
while to occasionally synthesize the available data, not only
for the benefit of co-workers in other localities, but for one’s
own information. In so doing, the area can be better understood in terms of a larger setting; unknown localities and
gaps in the record become more obvious and various problems which require solution are rather forcefully brought to
one’s attention. This helps considerably in planning additional research and avoiding over-specialization in some particular area or subject which may have enticed the individual’s
interests.
Within the last few years, great progress in archaeo!ogy
has been made in the Mississippi valley. The overall sequence
1. Aalde from the exceDt|ons noted, all apee|mens are in the Department of
thro~ology collections at the University of Oklahoma Museum, Norman, Oklahoma.

B

Texa~ Archgeologica~ and Paleontological ~ociet~

of events is becoming clear but the details remain obscure
and uncertain. In this general picture, Oklahoma is merely
part of a larger unit and the trend of prehistoric events more
or less duplicates that found in other sections of the Mississippi basin. However, it is also clear that eastern Oklahoma,
although a portion of the Caddoan Area, presents

develop-

ments which are different and more regional in character.
It is in this regional development that Oklahoma reflects its
individuality and distinctive features, and the role played,

FIGURE 1

Diagramatic Chart Indicating suggested chronological Relationships for the Various
Are~h~eologlcal Horizons of Oklahoma. Relative chronology is indicated by beginning at the bottom and proceeding towards the top.

A Survey o;f Oklahoma Archaeology

with respect to the broad trend of events, remains controversial and unsettled.
As materials already excavated are critically analyzed, and
as new excavations are planned with the purpose of answering troublesome problems, a clearer and more dynamic
terpretation of Oklahoma prehistory can be offered.
The Paleo-Indian Horizons
The term Paleo-Indian has been used to designate the various archaeological horizons in which artifacts have been
found in association with exf2nct animM remains. The most
common associations are the finding of projectile points along
with the bones of extinct types of bison and elephant. Such
an association indicates considerable antiquity, and, as such,
represents the earliest inhabitants of North America.
Although no actual Paleo-Indian site has been excavated
in the state of Oklahoma, accidental discoveries and surface
collections indicate that such sites are present and that the
better known complexes are represented. Most of these early
cultures are recognized by a specific Projectile point type
which characterizes these early peoples. Four Paleo-Indian
projectile point types are found in Oklahoma: Folsom, Clovis
fluted, Plainview and Scottsbluff.
The Folsom complex is generally represented by the Folsom fluted point, flint knives, snub-nosed scrapers, side
scrapers, crude choppers, gravers, hammerstones and some
worked bone objects.Well known Folsom sites are the Folsom site in New Mexico, the Lipscomb site in Texas and the
IAndenmeier site in Colorado. Folsom points have been found
in various sections of Oklahoma, and occur more frequently
in the western half of the state.
The Clovis fluted point is so named from types found at
Clovis, New Mexico. The Clovis point is similar to the Folsore point except that it is generally larger in size, thicker in
cross-section, less finely chipped and displays shorter channel flutes. Recent excavations in the Clovis area by the
Texas Memorial Museum indicate that the Clovis point is

10

Texas Archaeological and Paleontoloqical Society

older than Folsom. In Oklahoma the Clovis points are found
chiefly in the western section of the state.
The type known as the Plainview point has been established through excavations at Plainview, Texas. The Plainview
point is similar to the Clovis and Folsom types except that no
channel flutes have been removed. The relationship of the
Plainview type to either Clovis or Folsom is not understood
at the present time. The Plainview point is probably more
common in Oklahoma than either of the above mentioned
fluted types.
The Scottsbluff point has been found associated ,with extinct bison near Scottsbluff in Nebraska. This point is readily distinguishable from those mentioned above in that the
base is clearly differentiated from the blade. The .typical
Scottsbluff point is rather large in size, skillfully made and
has a square stemmed base. Examples of the Scottsbluff
point are to be found in Oklahoma although they are quite
scarce.
There are undoubtedly many ancient Paleo-Indian sites
present in Oklahoma; their discovery merely awaits recognition and excavation.
The Grove Focus
Probably as early as five thousand years ago the northeastern portion of the state was occupied by small scattered
bands of Indians whose subsistence was based entirely upon
hunting and the gathering of wild seeds. The occupation in
Oklahoma appears to represent an extension of the peoples
in the adjacent states of Missouri and Arkansas known
as the Ozark Bluff Dewellers. The sites in Oklahoma, however, rarely allow the preservation of the
perishable materials which characterize the latter group;
therefore, the occupation in Oklahoma is designated
as the Grove Focus.
The sites of this group have
been found in open fields besides the rivers and streams, but
the complex is primarily known from the excavation of
caves and bluff shelters where the remains of the Grove
Focus tend to be found in the deepest levels of the deposits.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

13

The sites themselves are small and suggest that they represent the remains of small family bands and were perhaps
hunting stations of a largely migratory people. The distribution of the sites in Oklahoma is primarily on the drainage
system of the Grand River and Neosho River in Delaware
county though it probably extends as far so~th as the eastcentral portion of the state.
The sites are small so far as areal extent is concerned.
However, they at .times attain a thickness of as much as
twelve feet of deposit during the preceramic period, which
suggests a long temporal duration. Th~s long period of occupation in the area is also indicated by the fact that during
their stay in the region their culture did change slightly so
that three periods of occupation can be segregated. The periods, or stages of cultural development, suggest a gradual
shift in economy from a purely hunting and gathering one to
one in which maize agriculture is beginning to play an important role. It is this latter stage which appears to be comparable to the Ozark Bluff Dweller culture.
In the earliest stage, the projectile points are represented
in a variety of large forms including side notched and corner
notched, contracting stem, broad parallel-sided and slightly
expanding stem and a variety with an expanding stem and
lobed base. Their distin,~ishing features are the presence of
a proportionately broad blade, occasional coarse serrations
on the blade, and a series having a distinct beveled blade.
In addition some points were made with a blunt tip, perhaps
for use in hunting birds. Other chipped stone implements include large drills, knives, a variety of scrapers including end
and side scrapers and roughly fabricated choppers. Polished
and ground stone implements include the full-grooved axe,
concave-faced abrading stones, anvils and small grinding
stones and mortars. It is suggested that the latter implements may have been utilized in grinding seeds.
In the second period essentially the same projectile points
are present though in different proportions. Additional
forms noted include a variety with a deep notch originating
toward the base of the point, a variety with a small stem

14

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological SocieSy

formed by shallow notches and forms resembling the Plainview types. The mean dimensions of the projectile points begin to diminish in this period. Drill, scrapers, and choppers
continue in this phase but in a greater variety of forms,
with the exception of the choppers which are decreasing in
numbers. A variation in the ground stone complex is indicated since large carefully shaped manos outnumber the small
grinding stones. This suggests a change in this aspect of the
economy and perhaps signals the introduction of corn. No
polished stone artifacts were found, but this period adds some
implements of bone and shell including a shell scraper and
bone awls and flaking tools.
The third period, representing the last phase of occupation
of the preceramic group, has a culture complex much like
that of the second period though again with changes in the
relative popularity of some of the artifact types. New additions include a series of small projectile points which sugges~ the appearance of the bow and arrow to supplement an
earlier exclusive us~ of the spear-thrower or atlatl. Other
new additions are a solid atlatl weight in polished stone and
with grooved ends and the chipped stone axe and hoe. Carefully fashioned manos become increasingly important which
suggests an increasing dependence upon agriculture. On the
other hand, the proportion of scrapers declines so skindressing may have been partially supplanted by some types
of textiles.
In accounts of the Ozark Bluff Dweller culture, suggestions of affiliation with the Southwestern portion of the
United States have been stressed. This has been based largely on some of the perishable remains such as the coiled
basketry and baby cradles and the type of corn. The complex
as seen in Oklahoma, stripped of its perishable materials
shows a far greater basic relationship to the Archaic cultures widespread in the eastern United States. The complex
is quite probably an early variant of this latter manifestation which, late in its stay in the Ozark region, received a
series of traits from the western states which modified the
basic eastern culture.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

15

The Cave Cutture of Western OkJahoma
Throughout western Oklahoma, especially in the Panhandle, there are many caves and rock shelters which have
produced archaeological materials. Our knowledge of this
region and the artifacts to be found in these caves is based
largely upon the excavation and publications of Dr. E. B.
Renaud.z Some additional salvage work was carried on in
this area by a University of Oklahoma field party.

Dr. Renaud excavated three sandstone caves located near
Kenton, Oklahoma in the summer of 1929. All of the caves
produced archaeological materia! which appeared to represent a simple semi-nomadic hunting people. The simplicity
of the culture and the types of specimens found suggested a
relationship to the better known Basket Maker people of
Arizona and New Mexico. Although this relationship remains questionable, a considerable antiquity is indicated by
many of the cave discoveries.
Cave excavations, because of the better conditions for
preservation, commonly yield artifacts not normally found
in mounds or village sites. The Kenton caves were no exception, and Dr. Renaud found an abundance of m~terial including many items such as basketry, fur, seeds, wood and
vegetal matter.
All of the caves were marked by the presence of pictographs painted in red on the sandstone w~l]s or ceilings. The
figures examined were square shouldered men and women or
various conventionalized symbols. In most cases, the natural
elements had so damaged the paintings that it was impossible to determine their original nature.
The caves produced a quantity of animal bones, apparently
the debris of successful hunts by the inhabitants. Bison and
deer bones were most abundant although other animals represented were elk, antelope, jack rabbit, cotton tail, coyote,
2.
Renaud, E. B.. "Les Plus Anciennes Cultures Prehistoriques du St~d-ouest
Americain," L’Anthropologie, Tome XL, No. 3. ]~p. 233-258, Paris, 1930. "Prehistoric Cultures of the Cimarron Yalley, Northeastern New Mexico and Western
Dklahoma," Colorado Scientific Society Proceedings, Vol. 12, No. 5 pp. I13-150.
Denver, 1930.

16

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

wild cat, badger, rodents and various birds including the
eagle and wild turkey. In plant remains, the caves produced
a variety of wild seeds, acorns, various fruits and berries,
squash and corn. The corn w~ represented by husks, . grains,
cobs and some complete ears. In one instance several ears of
corn were found encased in a prairie-dog skin bag.
Perishable artifacts included a variety of items. Two types
of yucca leaf sandals were found, one with a square toe and
another with a rounded toe. Some examples have a double
thickness with a reinforcement of cedar bark as padding for
the sole. Several types of basketry including the coiled variety so common in the Southwest were found. Various samples
of string and cordage of vegetal fiber, as well as bits of
rabbit fur and skin bags, were reported. Objects of wood
which were excavated included a dart foreshaft, a tube, a
fire drill, pointed sticks and what may be parts of a snare.
To the complex of wooden artifacts may be added the spearthrower found in earlier excavations of one of the same caves
studied by Renaud.3
Bone objects discovered were awls or perforating tools and
beads. The awls are sharpened pieces of bone, some having
been made from fiat sections of various animal bone fragments. The beads are tubular sections cut from bird bones.
No polished stone objects were found, and stone artifacts
were rather rare. Renaud reports the finding of several metares, all of irregular shape with an oval shaped grinding
basin. Small manos or hand stones were used as pounders or
grinders to crush their seeds and grain. A single selenite
pendant, rectangular in shape and with a small hole at one
end, was found in cave No. 1. The supporting string was still
tied through the perforation at the time of discovery.
The chipped stone materials are chiefly of quartzite, re!>resenting either crude unmodified flakes or flakes having a
small amount of chipping along the side or end. I~Iost of the
specimens appear to have been used as scrapers although
Baker, W. E., and A. V. Kidder. "A Spear
American Antiquity, VoL 8, No. 1, pp. ~;1-~;2, 1957.

Thrower From

Oklahoma,"

PLATE 2
Artifact~ from eaves of Western OklahDnut.
Kenion C~ave~: Woven snndals (1. ;I); hide moccasi~ t2); hammerstone {4); wooden
fire drill parts (5) ; skin bag containing seeds (6); scrapcr~ (7} ; corn e(~bs (8) ;
g’rindtng stone (9).
Acknowl~l~ents: Specimen 1, W~olaro.c Museum, l]art|esville: specimens 2-~, 5-6,
Oklahoma Histor|cal ~’v~eiety Museum, Ok|shores City.
Specimens 1, 2. 3 and 6 are I /16 actual size; all others are 1 /3 size.

A Survey o] Oklahoma Archaeology

19

some may have served as knives, choppers, points or punching tools.
The fact that no pottery, grooved axes, polished stone or
finished projectile points were found in any of the caves suggests considerable antiquity. Renaud suggests that the western Oklahoma cave materials represent a very early Basket
Maker culture which may have survived in an area marginal
to the Anasazi region of the Southwest.
The Fourche Maline Focus
The archaeological complex considered as Fourche Maline
is found in east central Oklahoma in southern Le Flore county. The excavated sites are situated along the Poteau River
and Fourche Maline Creek within a fairly limited area. It is
known, howover, from surface collections, that the Fourche
Maline materials are found throughout a much larger region
beyond the limits of the above mentioned area.
At the present time the actual content of the Fourche
Maline culture is not too clearly defined, and the analysis of
materials now on hand may alter the present concept concerning its nature. The Fourche Maline culture appears to
represent an early pre-pottery Archaic hunting and gathering people who’became acquainted with pottery and incorporated its manufacture into their technological achievements. The appearance of pottery, however, does not appear
to have materially changed their general pattern of life.
Although little data is available in the literature, a large
number of Fourche Maline sites have been completely or
partially excavated. Some sites where Fourche Maline materials ha~,e been found include Williams, Adams, Redwine,
Coplin, Heflin, Mackey, Sam, Cantre]!, Ward, Conser and
Scott. Most of these are now within the confines o~ the
Wister Reservoir.
The Fourche Maline sites are represented by accumulations of village debris or midden deposits situated on the
bar~_k of a river or stream. These middens are characterized
by a black colored earth which contains, scattered throughout the deposit, considerable amounts of clam shells, animal

20

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

bones, charcoal, fire cracked rocks, various artifacts, h~lman
burials, occasional occupational surfaces and other miscellaneous objects. No house patterns have been found at any of
the sites although occasional post holes were encountered
within the middens.
Both human burials and dog burials are found in the middens. The dog burials are not common, but human burials are
often found scattered throughout most of the midden area.
The majority of burials are of single individuals placed in a
flexed position without apparent body orientation and without grave offerings. Some multiple burials and bundle burials are known but occur only in a minority of cases. In
most burials there is no evidence of a grave outline which
suggests either that the body was placed upon the ground and
merely covered over with the surrounding midden debris, or
that the dark colored soils obscured the grave outlines. In
some cases where burials were found at the base of the midden, a shallow circular grave had been scooped out of the
underlying subsoil. In other instances, no grave outline was
observed even though soil colors should not have obscured
the evidences.
Projectile points are by far the most common chipped
stone artifact on the Fourche Maline sites. Points are
abundant on all sites, and the typical types are large in size,
rather crude in workmanship, and most commonly are made
of a dark colored quartzite or black flint. The predominant
shapes are stemmed forms with either a square or tapering
base. Other chipped stone objects include knives,
scrapers, double-bitted axes and miscellaneous unfinished
or unclassified specimens. The flint knives are usually
simple leaf-shaped or lanceolate forms although examples
of the triangular corner-tanged knife have been found at
some sites. Stone drills are rather common and appear in a
variety of forms. Many of the drills a~e actually drillpointed projectile points and may have been used for a
reamer. Scrapers are represented by simple flakes which
have some secondary chipping along one side or end. They
are crude and poorly made. The double-bitted flaked axe

A Survey of OkIahoma Archaeology

23

is also associated with the Fourche Maline complex and commonly exhibits abrasions or smoothed surfaces in the midsection, presumably resulting from the method of halting
the implement.
Specimens of ground stone include celts, axes, pendants,
gorgets, boatstones, atlatl weights, beads, grinding stones,
hammerstones, cupstones and miscellaneous objects. The
celt is represented by two varieties, a small well made celt of
black hematite and a larger ovoid shaped celt of igneous
or metamorphic stone. The celts do not appear to be especially distinctive although they do have a thick cross-section.
Examples of full-grooved stone axes have been found but
their occurrence is very rare. Pendants and gorgers are
represented by oval or rectangular tabular forms having
one or several perforations for suspension. The types found
exhibit considerable variety, and some are similar to those
from Early Woodland horizons in eastern United States.
The boatstone is fairly common at all sites and occurs in
a great variety of shapes and styles ranging from slender
keeled forms to those resembling a hemisphere. The base
may or may not be hollowed out, and perforations are infrequent. The barmerstone or atlatl weight is represented by
some fragments, but it is certainly a rarity at most sites.
Since there is such a relative abundance of the boatshaped
forms, they appear to replace the bannerstone type of atlatl
weight in the Fourche Maline area. Other specimens found
which should be mentioned are large stone beads and a
single fragment of what appears to be the stem of a stone
pipe. Vlith this exception, pipes are conspicuously absent
at Fourche Maline sites.
The Fourche Maline people utilized bone for a variety of
tools and implements. At most sites the bone or antler objects are common artifacts, and many of them are well
polished, carefully made and preserved in fine condition.
Bone projectile points are represented by two kinds: those
made from cutting off the end of an antler fine, and those
made from a splinter of bone which has been roughly rubbed down to a point. Many of these latter points resemble

24

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

crudely made bone awls except for the battered or blunted
tip which appears damaged from impact in use.

Bone awls

or perforating tools and bodkins are found at most sites.
The bodkins or bone pins are long pencil like pieces of
polished bone having a flattened, carved or pin type of head.
Although they may have served as a perforating tool,
their length, form and careful workmanship suggest a use
as hair ornaments. Bone atlatl hooks are represented by a
small number of skillfully made specimens. They are without sockets for attachment and the base has a slot into which
the prepared atlatl shaft was secure~t by inserting a pin.
Other bone artifacts include flaking tools, tapping tools, fish
hooks, and whistles made of large bird bones. Ornaments
made of bone include cylindrical beads, small flat perforated
discs, bone rings resembling a napkin ring and perforated
animal teeth. There are, of course, some examples of
worked bone which do not fall into the above categories
and whose use remains problematical.
Although broken and whole mussel shells are abundant in
the Fourche Maline middens, shell artifacts are not
common. Some shells have rubbed or worn edges and appear
to have been used as scrapers. Others have deep notches cut
into the edges and it is not known for what they were used.
A few ornaments of shell have been found including simple
pendants, gorgets and large beads. Although mussel shell
was used for ornaments, conch shell seems to have been
preferred for most objects.
Pottery is found on the Fourche Maline sites and is most
abundant in the upper levels. The typical pottery ware is a
thick, granular, clay or sherd tempered ware of brown color.
No complete vessels have been found although the sherds
indicate the typical vessel is a large and deep cylindrical jar
having a flat disc shaped base occasionally displaying a
basketry impression. The great majority of pottery sherds
are plain, the few decorated specimens being designed with
bold incisions. The decoration is largely confined to the rkm
or upper portion of the vessel with simple chevron, diamond
or ladder designs being most typical.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

27

The Fourche Maline complex represents the earliest
archaeological horizon now recognized in east central Oklahoma. It apparently lasted for a long period of time and
further research will undoubtedly define clear sub-divisions
within this time period. It may be suggested on the basis
of present evidence that the preceramic levels of the sites
could well be the equivalent of an Early Woodland horizon
and that a Middle Woodland alignment is indicated for the
ceramic levels, in part on the basis of trade sherds. This
implies, then, that although close ties are indicated with the
Archaic of the Southeast in terms of artifact types, it is a
peripheral survival of this complex into later times. This
is supported by indications of relationship to the later Gibson
Aspect materials since the Fourche Maline pottery closely
resembles the utility wares of this aspect. Even though
analysis of present collections will shed considerable light
on this material, additional data are needed from the surrounding area, especially Arkansas, in order to properly
understand the role played by the Fourche Maline people.
The Woodland Horizons
The earliest occupants of the northeastern portion of the
state who manufactured and used ceramics clearly show
their affiliation with the northern Mississippi valley in the
type of pottery made. While these cultures have affiliations
with cultures as distant as those of Wisconsin and Illinois,
it is probable that the occupation in Oklahoma represents
the southernmost thru.st of peoples who had previously
migrated to Missouri and eastern Kansas. Within the state
they are known primarily from excavations conducted in
Delaware county, but evidence of their occupation is found
as far south as Cherokee county where traces of their culture
have been recovered in bluff shelters on the Illinois River.
In Delaware county, the most extensive occupation discovered was at the Cooper site, located at the former junction of Honey Creek and Grand River, an area now covered
by the Grand River Lake. The Cooper site will be considered as the basis for the description of this horizon
though Woodland remains are also frequently encountered
in bluff shelters. Some of the bluff shelters contain variant

28

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

pottery types which indicate a limited occupation of the
region by Woodland people at both earlier and later times
than that represented by the Cooper site.
Even at the Cooper site, distinct areas of occupation containing variant pottery types indicate that the broad level
river terrace was occupied for a sufficient length of time
for variant styles of pottery to develop. The pottery, the
principal means of identifying the culture, is consistently
tempered with coarse fragments of crushed chert or limestone. The characteristic vessel shape is an amphora form
having a slightly constricted neck and a round or conical
base. In one area of the site, designated DICoV, the pottery was decorated primarily by the impressions of a
coarse-toothed dentate stamp, impressions of a cord-wrapped
stick, and more rarely by impressions of a fine-toothed dentate stamp. The decoration was characteristically compressed to a narrow band around the rim of the vessel.
Typical arrangements of the design elements are: (1)
vertical or diagonal impressions of a cord-wrapped stick
on the lip and upper section of the rim of the vessel; (2)
diagonal or vertical impressions of a coarse-toothed dentate
stamp on the upper portion of the rim and lip, occasionally
bordered at the lower edge by a horizontal line of dentate
stamping; and (3) a decoration similar to (2) executed
with a fine-toothed dentate stamp, occasionally in variant
patterns such as a horizontal band of dentate stamping in a
chevron pattern. More varied decorative patterns are found
on the pottery from a second area at the Cooper site,.
designated DICoI. The common decorative elements of this
unit are the fine-toothed dentate stamp, embossed nodes
formed by punching bosses from the interior of the vessel
while the clay was still plastic before firing, the use of
broad incised lines to border areas of stamping and fine
incised lines to form a decorative band at the rim, and
punctate elements primarily circular or wedge-shaped
forms. The coarse toothed dentate stamp and impressions
of the cord-wrapped stick are rarely found. A typical
decoration on a vessel might consist of a band of incised
cross-hatching or fine-toothed, diagonal impressions of a

A Survey o:f Oklahoma Archaeology

29

dentate stamp about the rim. This would be bordered on
the lower edge by a horizontal row of punctate impressions
or a broad incised line. Below this, on the shoulder area
of the vessel, would be placed diagonal bands, vertical bands,
or oval areas of dentate stamping, the stamping being
bordered by a broad incised line. The effect of the decoration is to get in opposition roughened areas covered by
dentate stamping with smooth or slightly polished plain

zones.
The latter pottery style, found at DlCoI, is most characteristic of the Hopewellian phase of the Woodland pattern
and probably represents a slightly earlier period of occupation than that of D1CoV. The indication of Hopewellian
affiliation is confirmed by the presence of a few artifacts
not found in the area in which the pottery of D1CoV is
present. The most interesting of these consists of ~wo
fragments of a small pottery figurine. One fragment is the
head of a figurine which bears an elevated area on the top
resembling the copper head plates which are occasionally
found on skulls of burials in Ohio Hopewell mounds. Details
of hairdress and ornament are given in what appears to be a
rounded coil of hair at the right, rear of the head and in
an elongation of the lobes of the ears---probably the representation of ear spools. The other portion of the figurine
is a section from the waist to the knees, the person being
represented as wearing a breechcloth. Similar specimens
are frequently found in Hopewell sites, one of the notable
series coming from the Turner Mound in Ohio. Other artifacts confined to this unit include some objects of polished
hematite, among them fragments of a perforated gorget and
a boatstone. A few sherds found in this unit probably
represent fragments of vessels obtained in trade. Their
temper, containing a large portion of mica, is foreign to the
Oklahoma region and some aspects of the decoration, such
as the use of smooth rocker impressions, set the fragments
apart from local pottery types. The sherds are quite similar
to pottery found in the Kansas City area.
Chipped stone artifacts from the two components are
quite similar. Projectile points are found in large numbers,

3{}

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

the most common shapes being large points with deep or
shallow notches in the corners. Points with contracting
stems are less common but are found in both components.
The abundance of projectile points suggests that hunting was
an important aspect of their economy. Though animal bones
have largely decayed, the teeth of bison as well as deer
were found. The importance of hunting would appear to be
confirmed by a large series of scrapers which could have
been used in skin dressing activities. They occur in a great
variety of form and sizes including end scrapers and a
series of forms which are circular in outline and often somewhat cone-shaped. The latter varieties appear to be distinctive features of the Woodland horizons~in Oklahoma. Other
chipped stone forms include large and small knives in
lanceolate, ovate and stemmed shapes, perforators, and
chipped stone axes, though the latter appear infrequently.
That the economy of the Woodland peoples is not solely
dependent upon hunting is indicated by large numbers of
grinding stones, many of these being carefully shaped oval
manos of sandstone, and grinding basins or metates having
an oval depression in which corn could have been reduced
to flour.
It is probable that the Woodland peoples did not build
very substantial houses. No traces of them have been found
in the excavations though a number of slightly depressed
areas which could have represented house floors were
uncovered. In some of these, fragments of metates and
grinding stones were present as were numerous pieces of
limestone that could have been originally in association
with fireplaces to support the pottery vessels used in cooking. The pottery vessels, because of their conical bases,
could not stand without some sort of a support. So far as
household equipment is concerned, one distinction between
the two components described is that in D1CoV a number
of small cache pits were discovered, some of them having
been lined with slabs of limestone and shale. These pits,
generally about 2.5 to 3 feet in diameter and perhaps about
two feet in depth, could have been utilized as a~ storage
place for supplies of corn.

~5
17

PLATE 5
Stone iml>|ements and
pottery figurine from the Wood/aod Horizons in Northeastern
Oklahoma.

~,,~
-,. XnIy~ 116 ~ ~,~ ,,~e ~ace on]~- ,c~ . 0.faces (5):
...... mnno fragmeni (~9~’’~v~ ; pink (20) * ~,,~.~ ’ cn~pped stone
Potte~, fi~rine is characteristic ¯ --~ : pottery figt~ri~e’ ~,,u~e celt (21) . abr :...s
(1 ~ ).
,
artier
m~ are found throughout th-- ~" ~; the
manufaCtUred

count)..

...... ~. v U~Oer ~ite, Unit V : a~ othur~ Cool, or site. U~it I, Delnware

All specimens are i/3 size,

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

33

Though Woodland peoples elsewhere, particularly the
Hopewellian group, buried their dead in mounds, no traces
of such a practice have been uncovered in Oklahoma. A few
burials were found among the occupational debris of the
Cooper site but hardly enough to account for what must
have been an occupation of’ substantial numbers. It seems
possible that some burials may have been made in the various rock shelters of the area. In one, located on the opposite
side of Honey Creek from the Cooper site (D1CoVI), the
more than seventy five individuals buried in the shelter represented far more people than could be accounted for on the
basis of the small area that actually represented a habitation
zone. It would appear that the frontier settlements of the
Woodland pattern in Oklahoma, burying their dead with
little ceremony and no grave goods in whatever areas were
convenient, failed to keep up all of the religious and ritual
aspects of life as maintained in their major cultural centers.
The Spiro Focus
The Spiro focus has been defined by Orr as including the
following sites: Craig 1, Brown 3 and 4, Evans 3, Ward 2,
Groseclose, Brackett, Norman, Gahagan and Mineral
Springs 4.4 Krieger has brought attention to the Spiro focus
and pointed out the fact that much work must be done
before anything definite can be accepted.S It is certainly
apparent that detailed analyses and reports are necessary
before a reinterpretation of these materials can be presented.
Krieger has considered the Spiro focus materials as a
part of a larger Gibson Aspect which underlies the later
Fulton Aspect horizons. The Gibson Aspect includes not
only the Spiro focus, but also Alto, Gahagan, Sanders and
Haley. In addition, Krieger offers a slightly different list
of sites as comprising the Spiro focus: Craig, Brown, Ward,
Evans, GrosecIose, Hughes, Norman, Brackett, Mineral
4.
Ore. Kenneth G., "The ArchaeIogical ~ituation at Spiro, OkIahoma:
liminary Report," American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 228-2S6, 1946.

5.

A

Pre-

Newell, H. Perry and Alex Kr~eger, The George C. Davis Site Cherokeo County,

Texas, Memoir No. 5, Society for American Archaeology, p. 199, 1949.

34

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Springs, Jaggers and Mustang Creel~e Bell has recently
added the Harlan site as another example.7 Thus it is
clear that what actually constitutes the Spiro focus is rather
vague.
It is becoming increasingly apparent that sites included
in the Spiro focus do not comprise a uniform group. It is
also clear that differences between some of the sites indicate
either a chronological or regional variation. The differences
in cultural material between such sites as Harlan and Norman or Harlan and Hughes suggest that these differences are
a result of time rather than location since they are all three
situated within twenty miles of each other. When all of
these sites are grouped together under the Spiro focus, the
relationship of the sites to each other is obscured. A
much better understanding of the situation would be to consider all of the sites as representing a more generalized
Gibson Aspect, with the different sites occupying various
chronological positions within the Gibson Aspect time period.
As additional analysis and discoveries appear, the inter-relationships and focus assignments will become much clearer.
For purposes of~general description in this paper, the
Craig, Brown and Evans sites will be used as representing
the Spiro focus. This is basically the same as what Orr
has designated as the Middle Spiro component.8
The three sites, Craig, Brown and Evans all represent
excavations in the Spiro area, and the Craig mound is the
one site from which so much spectacular material was removed a few years ago. All of these sites are located north
of Spiro, Oklahoma in the Arkansas River valley of Le Flore
county.
The Spiro focus materials appear to be found chiefly in
east-central Oklahoma along the major water courses. The
sites are characterized by various sized earthen mounds of

6.

]’/ewell, H. Perry and Alex Krieger, ibid., p.

199-200.

7.
I~ell, Robert E., "Archaeological Excavations at the Hartan Site, Fort Gibson
Reservoir, Cherokee County, Oklahoma," Plains Archaeological Conference New~letter, VoL 3, lqo. 1, pp, 3-1~, 1949.
8.

Orr, K. G., op. cir.

PLATE
Pottery sherds from Wo~tland ttorizons in Northeastern Okhdumm.
Upper two rows are rim sherds from the lto!~cweHian horizon {C~per site, Uoit
~wo pottery types are represented, one grit tempert~t {1-2, 6), the other clay tempered

~3-5.

The lower two rows are sherds f~om the ]ate Woodland horizon {Cooper
Unit V).
All are ~r[t tempered.
Sherd~ ~-12 represent ~ continuity of
~hnlque~ while the remainder show the ~ew decoration motifs that nre dominant
during the lute period.
All apec~mens are 1 /3 si~e.

A ~uruev o] O~ho~ A~chaeo~ogy

two types: burial mounds and domicilliary or gub-structure
mounds. The burial mounds are conical or hemispherical
in shape, and commonly two or more may be connected
together to form a compound mound. The domicilliary
mounds are square or oval truncated mounds serving as a
foundation for a house structure. These sub-structure
mounds commonly exhibit several construction phases
wherein the mound was enlarged from time to time.
The Craig mound produced a variety of burials including
group or multiple burials, single burials; extended, flexed
and semi-flexed burials; bundle burials and cremations.
Group burials are probably the most common and may
contain from two to thirty individuals. Grave goods were
found with a large number of the burials although not all
graves contained artifacts. Some burials were especially
rich in grave goods while others produced relatively little,
if any, associated material.
The Spiro focus houses are found in the general region
of the mounds, and are represented by square or rectangular
structures having a narrow passageway entrance. The
floors are of baked clay and without additional features
such as fireplaces or cache pits. The house walls are represented by post holes placed every foot or so apart; the
covering roof apparently having been constructed over four
centrally placed support posts.
Village debris is not
abundant around the Spiro houses and this adds to the
difficulty of correlating the architecture with the burial
complex.
The various artifacts from the Craig mound have received
much recognition for their quality, workmanship and
unusual characteristics. In addition, many items of a perishable nature were well preserved, and this material permits a more detailed picture as to the life and cultural accomplishments of the Spiro people.
Chipped stone materials from the Spiro focus are of
excellent workrnanship and include a wide variety of forms.
Small flint projectile points are very common in many of

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

the graves.

The points range through a wide variety of

shapes and forms with slender serrated and barbed types
being most common.

Flint knives and spear points are also

varied in form but typically of good workmanship.

Many

of the knives are unusual in size, some measuring twelve
inches or more in length.

The smaller knives are sometimes

notched to ~facilitate halting, and some notched forms may
represent either knives or spear points. Many of the large
Hint knives are of such size and workmanship as to suggest
that they were not ordinary utilitarian objects but rather
served some more sacred function. Flared or spatulate celts
of flint are also present, and in most cases the flint has been
ground and polished to remove the flake scars. Several flint
maces or batons have been found, and in most cases these
have also been ground and polished.
The Spiro chipped flint not only exhibits an unusual skill
in workmanship, but the flint material has been derived
from a number of sources. Specimens from quarries as far
away as Illinois, Arkansas, Tennessee and Nebraska can be
seen in the flint collections.
Chipped stone hoes are also found in the Spiro focus.
These are long rectangular or oval forms and in most
examples, are rather crude in workmanship.
Objects of ground stone are also abundant and include
the following: celts, spatulate celts or spuds, discoidals,
boatstones, plummets, ear spools, both plain and effigy
pipes, perforated spatulate axes, monolithic axes, beads, flat
button shaped objects, hammerstones, metates, manos and
other miscellaneous articles. Items which appear to be
especially distinctive are the pulley-shaped stone ear spools,
the T-type stone pipe and the black stone beads. The stone
ear spools are commonly designed and covered over with
a thin veneer of copper on one side. The T-type stone pipe
has a projection which extends beyond the bowl to a length
about equal to the stem. Some of these pipes are unusually
large, and examples having two bowls are known. Much of
the stone material illustrates careful and skillful workman-

S~e

t~,~. pottery

Si~

~ll~tt°n: All spectn~ens ~re fron~ the

~untY.

specin~en~ I~ are I

A Survey o~f Oklahoma Archaeology

41

ship with all types of stone, including quartz crystal, having
been utilized.
Artifacts made of bone are very rare in the Spiro focus
sites.

Bone awls or perforating tools, disc shaped beads,

occasional ornaments and flat polished pieces of ribs or long
bones are represented.

These latter specimens are long flat

pieces of bone which would make good tools for weaving
textiles; however, there is no assurance that they were used
for that purpose.
The Craig mound is famous for the abundance of shell
artifacts found, especially the carved and engraved conch
shell containers. The preferred shell was the marine conch,
and it was manufactured into a variety of objects, primarily
ornaments. Shell specimens include beads of many types,
pendants, figurines, gorgers, ear spools, plain and engraved
shell dippers, button-like objects, and other miscellaneous
items. Shell was also used as a decorative inlay on wooden
objects. The most interesting part of the shell work is the
various scenes engraved on the shell dippers or circular
gorgets. The engravings illustrate various aspects of life
among the Spiro people, and a detailed study of the existing
specimens would shed much light on the Spiro focus.
Copper is also represented in the Spiro focus, and the
Craig mound produced a rather large quantity of hammered
copper specimens. Copper was used not only to make
specific objects such as axes, but it was commonly used as
a veneer on stone or wood. In fact, many wooden objects
were salvaged primarily because of the surrounding copper
sheath which protected and preserved the wood. Objects
of copper include long needle like bodkins or hair pins,
beads, axes, ear spools, various shaped head ornaments and.
flat copper plates having embossed designs. The copper
work is typically flat and in rather thin sheets which are
composed of many small pieces which have been overlapped
and riveted together.
Many specimens exhibit mends,
patches and repairs which suggest a long and rather vigorous
usage.

42

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

The Spiro focus pottery wares require careful analysis
and identification before anything definitive can be accepted. The pottery represented, however, falls into two
main groups, the common utility ware and the variou~ wares
associated with the burials. The utility pottery is represented by a rather thick, granular clay tempered ware.
The common vessels are large globular jars or bowls having
a round flat disc or squared base. The decoration is limited
to horizontal incised lines extending around the rim of the
vessel. The distinctive burial ware has a similar paste and
tempering material but the sherds are thinner, the tempering more finely pulverized, and the surface has been more
carefully smoothed and polished. The burial pottery also
differs in vessel form and decoration. Two vessel forms
which appear to clearly represent the Spiro focus are the
deep straight sided bowl and the tall conical necked bottle.
The vessels are commonly incised or decorated within a
wide band delimited by three or four horizontal line~.
Enclosed design elements include interlocking scrolls, reed
or triangular punctates and circle figures. It is also common
to have triangular areas of the designs filled in by a series of
nested arcs.
The pottery from the Craig site is much more varied than
the above data would indicate, and a large variety of shapes
and designs have been found. Much of the burial pottery,
however, is probably trade specimens from outside areas
and not therefore especially typical of the Spiro focus.
Pottery pipes are also present in small numbers. Some
of these are ciay imitations of the T-type stone pipe, and
others represent a distinct variety.
The latter type is
characterized by a thin conical bowl placed on a small
tubular clay stem, the tubular base projecting for a short
distance beyond the bowl. These clay pipes are much
smaller in size and appear rather fragile beside the more
massive stone pipes.
A large variety of wooden objects, most having been preserved by their association with copper, were recovered
from the Craig mound. Specimens represented are spindle

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

43

shaped beads, small carvings of the human head, various
types of ear spools, button-like objects, combs, human face
masks, axe handles and a variety of effigy forms. Some
of the wooden objects still have pigments clinging to the
surface indicating that they had been painted when in use.
Wood was also used in combination with shell to produce
more elaborate artifacts. Red cedar was used in manufacturing most of the wood specimens.
A number of miscellaneous items which have not been
mentioned above have been found at the Craig site. These
include pearl beads, seed beads, various pigments such as
green, red, white, black and yellow; mica fragments, quartz
crystals, iron pyrites, polished concretions, plaited cane
and bark matting, fiber cloth, feather cloth, lacework, fragments of leather and galena. The presence of irregular or
rounded lumps of galena appears to be especially characteristic of the Spiro focus sites, and it is a common feature in the
burial mounds.
It is, of course, impossible to adequately describe the
Spiro focus materials in such a short space as this, and
in all probability the picture presented by the Craig site is
a very distorted one. The matter of preservation and the
fact that the Craig mound must represent an unusual site
even in prehistoric times makes it atypical and hence difficult to interpret and understand. As related sites are
analyzed, and as the neighboring areas are better understood, the Spiro focus will become more properly a part of
the surrounding cultural setting and can be viewed in a
more realistic perspective.
The Bryan Focus
The construction of a dam on Red River which resulted
in the innundation of much of the fertile bottom lands adjacent to the river and its tributaries in Bryan and Marshall
counties was responsible for a series of excavations of Indian
sites in this region. One of the most distinctive complexes
found in the area is represented by several sites excavated
on the Red and Washita Rivers and has been designated the

44

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Bryan focus.

The site which best represents the complex

is the NIarrs site (BrMaI) which covers several acres on a
high bluff bordering the eastern edge of the flood plain of the
Washita River.

The site is a particularly valuable one since

relatively extensive excavation and testing suggested that
an accurate picture of the village as a whole had been obtained. Details on house construction and village arrangement are derived from this site though the sketch of material
culture of the complex is based upon a series of sites in this
area.
The house form shows a generic relationship to those present in the eastern portion of the state in the Spiro and McCurtain loci, though there is a much greater uniformity in
the houses of the NIarrssite. All of the houses are square,
ranging from eighteen feet to thirty-seven and a half feet
along the side. The roof was supported by four center posts.
The open area in the center of these supporting posts was
used as a fireplace, and in one house the fireplace was carefully manufactured of baked clay. Its diameter was seven
and a half feet, and the concave base was surrounded by an
inward leaning wall of clay a foot and a half in height. No
post molds are found in the exact corners of the house which
suggests that perhaps in these areas the wattling was bent
around to form a rounded corner. The entrance to the houses
is represented by a row of parallel posts. In all, five houses
were found at the lYlarrs site. Of these, four faced the west
and one the east. In the village area, scattered among the
houses which appeared to be arranged with little thought
toward a uniform village plan, are numerous cache pits.
These occur in both bell-shaped and U-shaped forms and
often attain quite a large size. Occasionally charred corn
was found in these pits, which suggests their function. The
people of the Bryan focus must have been primarily farmers
and, if the size and number of the pits constitutes valid
evidence, highly successful farmers.
The implements and pottery manufactured by this group
set them apart from other prehistoric Indians in Oklahoma,
but a few fragments of pottery and other implements are so

~9

P |,AT~:

Bryan focus artifacts.
¯
Chipped stone drills

~0

S

~rojectile points (3-9) ; knife (10) : double-t~olnt~l
o ¯
(1-.) ,, ]
~t" ~1">~" antler flaking t~!
~
-

t~l (19); antler ~ppmg ~m~
~ne ~lt

~--..- .......

Sit~ allocation: I, 7-9, 11, g4-25 Marts ai~. Bryan county; all others Fl~nagan ~i~,
~an county.
All ~imena I/5

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

47

similar to remains of these other groups as to indicate that
they were probably acquired through trade. Such artifacts
enable one to determine the relative age of the Bryan focus
and place it in its proper position in relation to these other
cultures. Two types of pottery appear to have been manufactured locally. One is commonly tempered with medium
to large fragments of shell, rarely with crushed particles of
bone. The surfaces are smooth, but not polished, and range
from grey-brown to tan with darker shades predominating.
The walls of the vessels are relatively thick, ranging from
.6 to 1.2 cm. Two vessel forms appear to be present: (1)
a large to medium globular jar with a short flaring rim or a
vertical, collared rim; (2) a deep wide-mouthed jar or bowl
either lacking a defined rim area or having a.collared rim.
The bases of the vessels are flat, and on one the impression
of a coiled basket was noted. Vessels of this type are rarely
decorated, but one has a strip of clay pinched up with
finger nail imprints from the clay of the wall. The second
type of pottery has a temper of fine clay or sparse bone and
its texture is much more compact than that of the preceding
type. Colors tend to be somewhat darker, and the surfaces
are also smooth. The vessels appear to be somewhat smaller
in size, and the forms include a deep bowl or jar with convex
or straight sides and a jar with a curved, slightly flaring
rim. Occasionally this type is decorated with a series of
horizontal, widely-spaced incised lines or by means of short
vertical tabs on the rim. Sherds which apparently represent trade vessels include: (1) rim sherds from a bowl
bearing a red slip and a short vertical rim having an engraved decoration of diagonal lines of the exterior--a type
suggestive of Sanders Engraved; (2) sherds of a thick, black
smoothed ware representing a squat globular vessel bearing
abundant, horizontal finger-nail impressions; (3) sherds of a

thin-walled bowl with a fine incised decoration reminiscent
of a Spiro focus type; and (4) clay and grit temper sherds
of a tall jar with slightly constricted orifice.
Pottery techniques were also used in the manufacture of
pipes. The form present has a small bowl with a thin, cylindrica! stem and stem projection. The form is similar to the

48

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

small pottery pipes of the Spiro focus though the bowl has
either nearly straight or convex sides rather ~:han the conical
bowl of the latter complex. The polished and ground stone
complex includes celts which taper from the edge to a
pointed or rounded poll, manos and metates with a~ elliptical grinding basin. Bone implements include awls manufactured from splinters of animal long bone and from deer
ulnae, bone beamers, antler cylinders and flaking tools both
of deer antler and deer ulnae with blunt tips. Chipped
stone implements include flake knives, small end scrapers,
knives, T-shaped drills, bipointed drills and a series of projectile points. The common projectile point is small, about
2. to 2.5 cm., in length; it is carefully flaked and has straight,
convex or recurved sides to the body, a horizontal shoulder
area and a stem that may be straight sided but is usually
rounded and contracting. Some large points of similar shape
are also present. A few small points of variant shape are
present but do not appear to have been manufactured locally,
or at least, not in large numbers. These include triangular
points with horizontal side notches and small points with
diagonal corner notches. Some of the latter have a body
with a serrated edge. The presence of coiled basketry is
indicated by impressions on the base of pottery vessels.
In ceramics, suggestions of alignment in time were noted
in what might be trade sherds of both the Sanders
focus in Texas and the Spiro focus. It might also be noted
that the small projectile points are not unlike the type
Bonham Barbed of the Lamar focus. This would suggest
a temporal placement in perhaps late Gibson Aspect times,
though the cultural complex is more divergent than even the
Sanders focus from the cultural units of this aspect. It is,
in most respects, a more typical Plains culture.
The NeZson Focus
This complex is based upon material recovered in the
excavation of two sites in southern Choctaw county located
not far from the town of Grant on Red River. The available
¯information regarding these sites does not permit an analysis which might reveal whether the sites contain more than

A Survey of Oklahoma Arch~eoIogy

49

one cultural component or an occupation of long duration in
which cultural changes are to be detected.

Consequently,

realizing that further excavation to check this point would
be desirable, we have tentatively described the artifactual
material

as

representing a

single cultural complex

of

relatively short duration.
The burial complex of both sites is remarkably uniform
and distinctive. The graves consist of single interments,
fully extended and resting upon the back. The arms were
normally extended along the side of the body, but in a few
instances one or both arms were flexed. A single burial,
though resting on the back, had the legs flexed backward
on either side of the body. The majority of the burials were
without grave furniture but some possessed pottery vessels,
pottery pipes, and/or a few projectile points. The pottery
vessels in particular tended to be clustered around the head
of the individual. In all, six pottery vessels were present as
burial associations; three were found with one burial, two
with a second, while the third had but one. Four of these
vessels are undecorated bowls comparable to Sanders Plain
of the Sanders focus of Texas.9 Two of these are simple
bowls; one has a scalloped lip while the other has four vertical lip tabs. The other two are carinated bowls. One of the
remaining vessels found as a burial association is a small
bottle having a cylindrical neck and a truncated body of
angular outline. It is decorated with engraved concentric
circles, of which there are three elements separated by a
vertical cross-hatched element. The remaining vessel of this
group is a small globular jar with a flaring rim having as a
decoration four small non-functional strap handles, horizontal incising on the rim and body and a series of vertical
rows of small nodes. The pipes utilized as burial associations included a thin-walled elbow pipe of pottery as well
as a pipe with a flaring bowl and stem of small diameter.
The projectile points included a single large dart point with

9.
Krieger, Alex D., Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas, The
University of Tex~s Publication No. 4640, pp. 187-190. 1945.
Descriptions of additional potte~" types attributed to the Sanders focus are to be found in this- report.

50

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological SocieSy

a contracting stem as well as four small arrow points with
stems formed by notching.
Material found as refuse in the general area of the burials
adds considerably to the trait complex. In pottery, ~it is
evident that additional Sanders focus types are present.
These include Sanders Engraved, Canton Incised, and
Monks~own Fingernai~ Impressed. Maxey Noded Redware
may be represented by a single fragmentary bottle with a
composite silhouette. There are, however, many sherds that
suggest incised and engraved types that would be more at
home in Spiro focus components. One basal sherd bore
a coiled basketry impression. Pottery pipes found in the
refuse appear to be exclusively of the variety having a thinwalled, conical bowl and a long, slender tubular stem.
Implements in bone and shell are also represented in the
collection. A single fishhook of bone is a sturdy specimen
made of thick-walled animal long bone. The bone awls are
sharpened splinters of long bone. Flaking tools are represented both by antler tips and bone splinters with worn,
rounded tips. A deer cannon bone with grooves cut in four
places may be comparable to an unusual implement form
present in the Sanders focus and perhaps was used in the
same manner as the bone beamer to which it is related
in form. Large mussel shells having a single large perforation are of the familiar "hoe" type.
The characteristic celts of the complex are either carelessly ground into a rectanguloid form or roughly flaked into
shape, with the major grinding occurring about the blade.
Blocks of sandstone, which are ungrooved but have concave
facets indicating use, may have been used in the manufacture of these implements.
Other specimens with a
depression pecked in one surface may have served as anvils.
Chipped stone implements include the double-bitted axe,
a leaf-shaped point or knife and projectile points of the types
indicated as being used as burial associations. The large
points uniformly have a contracting stem and range in
length from 29 to 86 mm., the average length being 48 turn.
The small projectile points have stems of varying shape

9

PLATE 9
Nelson focus artifacts.
Chipped double-bitted axe (1) ; deer cannon bone with longitudinal grooves 12) : pr~jectile point.~ (3-5. 10-11): stone colt~ (6, 14): douhlc pointed hone implement (fish
gorue ~) ~7)’ ~ne awl (S)" fish hook ~9); potte~ pipes (12-13): antler flaking
~i" (1~; ~o~ awl Of canno~* "hone (16) ; mussel shell hoe (17) ; pottery sherds {18-26).
19 is the rim of a carinated Imwl with r~t slil~ and a flatten~ lip scalloped on the
ex~rior, and is suggestive of Sanders Engrave.
Of the sherds illustrated only
19 and ~r~p~ 21 show the clo~e relationship to the Sanders focus t~ugh ~elect~l
~rial could show this clearly. The sherds were selected to illustrate the variant types
found at the sites which set the material almrt from the Sanders focus.
Site allocalion : I, 11. 14-15, 21, 26 Cook site ; all others Nelson site, Choctaw county.
All

a~ecimens are one-third

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

53

produced by notching, and in some instances the body is
serrated. These range in length from 23 to 28 ram., the
average length being 26 mm.
Though there are important differences, the complex
designated as the Nelson focus shares a large series of traits
with the Sanders focus now known primarily through manifestations in Texas. The Nelson focus may possibly represent a peripheral variant of this culture, strongly influenced and modified by contacts with Spiro focus components
in Oklahoma.
The McCurtain Focus
Our knowledge of the achaeology of the southeastern portion of Oklahoma is derived from a partial survey made of
the area and the excavation of two sites located on Little
River and its tributaries. In the light of culture sequences
established elsewhere in the state and in adjacent regions,
it seems probable that the two sites represent, in part,
slightly different time periods of the same culture complex,
which has been designated the McCurtain focus.
The earlier of the two sites is the Clement site. Excavations at this site included a flat-topped temple mound, several
houses and a midden and cemetery area. A smaller mound
is located several hundred feet west of the one excavated
and a rather large mound is a short distance t~ the north.
Neither of these two mounds was excavated, but they appeared to also represent temple or sub-structure mounds.
The temple mound excavated had been built in two superimposed stages, and a house had originally been constructed
underneath the mound. Details of the house type were not
clear. Two overlapping house patterns were discovered in
the midden area north of this temple mound. One house was
square, slightly over twenty-five feet along the sides and
had a trench entrance with a length of six feet orientated
slightly west of south. The roof of this house was supported
by four center posts, and immediately inside the entrance
passageway was a flat, elevated area of baked clay having
the outline of a half circle. To the west of ~his house, with

54

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

walls slightly overlapping upon it, was a second house. It
was not possible to tell which of the two houses was the
later. The second house might almost be classified as rectangular, the dimensions of the sides being 17.4 feet by
18.7 feet. The center roof supports consisted of but two
posts. This house also had a trench entrance passageway
with a length of 15 feet and facing the southwest. Additional houses were found on a ridge adjacent to the river,
but, since numerous burial pits in the same area have
tended to destroy the patterns, it was impossible to obtain
details other than that they are square or rectangular.
Burials were found in the house area just mentioned,
in the midden area north of the temple mound and in a
large rectangular pit excavated in the center of the temple
mound. Though this latter burial was inserted after the
temple mound was constructed, the mound itself was undoubtedly constructed by the same group of people since
their characteristic pottery types are found in the mound
fill. In many instances it was not possible to obtain details
concerning burial customs since the bone had often completely decomposed. The original position of the burials was
indicated by the outlines of the grave pit and by the placement of burial associations which usually took the form of
pottery vessels. Where bone material could be found, it
was evident that the characteristic burial position was extended upon the back, and from one to four pottery vessels
were placed beside the head and sides of the body. The pit
burial in the temple mound deviates from the typical individual grave in the area surrounding the mound and
deserves special comment. Vertical posts placed in the
corner of the pit indicated that perhaps some type of roofing
originally covered the burial. On the floor of the pit were
the remains of ten individuals, both fully, flexed and
extended with a variable orientation of the head and some
superposition of the bodies. Grave offerings were extremely
abundant for this complex and were placed among and on
the bodies. The offerings consisted of pottery vessels,
pairs of ear spools made of wood and stone, small projectile points, a ground stone celt, a shell gorget of marine

A Survey o:f Oklahoma Archaeology

55

conch shell bearing an engraved cross, and shell, seed, and
pearl beads.
Other structural features found at this site included cache
pits that had the form of a shallow basin and a variety
with deep straight sides.
The second site excavated in NIcCurtain county is the
McDonald site located approximately four miles north of
the town of Glover on the west bank of Glover River.
Excavation was primarily concentrated upon a midden area
which had also been used as a cemetery. Less extensive
testing was done in other portions of the site. There are no
traces of house floors in this midden area which in a deposit
of from two to three feet of thickness sherds, stone artifacts and bone refuse are scattered. The burials were inserted in rectangular pits dug in this deposit, and in a few
instances the graves penetrated into the clay subsoil.
Although frequently the bone had completely decomposed
or only teeth caps were present, extended burials on the
back were suggested. A total of thirty burials were found
and of these only five lacked grave associations. The most
characteristic burial offerings were pottery vessels and from
one to seven were found with single individuals. The average number of vessels found in a grave is 2.7. The only
additional types of burial furniture were a group of 17 projectile points, a deer mandible and a few sherds, each of
these traits having occurred only once. It should be mentioned that the burials may not have been extended in all
instances, since one primary adult inhumation was partially
flexed on the left side. This burial had characteristic burial
furniture in that two pottery vessels were placed at the
back of the individual near the pelvis. While there was
considerable variety in the placement of associations, there
appeared to be a general tendency to group them about the
head and shoulders. There were two instances in which a
vessel was deliberately inverted and one instance in which
a small vessel was placed inside a larger one. These latter
traits are quite interesting since, in these instances at least,
we cannot assume that the purpose of the placement of yes-

56

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Soc~ety

sels in the grave was as a container for a food offering. There
seems to have been some need for the vessel itself.
A village area to the west of the midden zone described
above was only briefly tested since the war brought operations in this county to a close.

However, the area did yield

four burials. The only new trait added to the burial complex was the presence of green pigment in one of the pottery vessels used as burial furniture. The area also yielded
a single house, the only one excavated at this site. The
house was circular in outline with a maximum diameter of
18 feet. The entrance on the north side of the house is represented by pairs of post molds set at each end of the entrance passage and connected by a trench slightly V-shaped
in cross-section. This passageway was eleven feet in length.
No center posts were located but an ash bed in the central
portion of the floor appeared to represent the fire area, and
two shallow metates were found near the outer limits of this
zone on the floor level.
Ceramic remains of the two sites in iVfcCurtain county
are quite similar since the same three basic wares are present. One of these is a dark, polished ware having the
surfaces decorated either by engraving or incising. Red
ochre is frequently rubbed in the lines of the decoration.
Vessel shapes include water bottles with spherical or flattened bodies and straight sided necks, and cazuela bowls. A
second common type bears a red slip on the surface and is
generally found as a composite olla shape and as a deep bowl.
.The decoration takes the form of scalloping of the lip with
incised and excised decoration on the rim and shoulder
areas of the olla or jar. The third pottery type probably
represents the ordinary utility form and characteristically
occurs as a jar with a squat, globular body and with a proportionately tall, recurred or flaring rim. The orifice of the
vessel is frequently square with the rim decorated with
pinched corrugations or an incised decoration. Additional
decoration is also found in the form of applied strips of
clay and as strap or loop handles, these latter being decorative rather than functional.

PLATE
McCurtain focus artifacts.
I’rojt~ctile points (1-6) ; pottery elb~w pipe (7) ; conch shell gorget (8~ ; stone hoe (9) ;
stone blade il0~ ; perforated sherd (11) : stone celt (12) ; ~tone ear" sp~ls, front and
back 113): pottery vessels (14-20).
14 and 15 are miniature v~els, duplicating r~
slipp~ ~wls that are normally four to five times the size of these upectmens.
14 is
a characteristic Avery Engraved Corm,
16 is the basic utility ware, a Nash Neck
l~and~ variety.
17, while duplicating the form of N~sh N~ck Banded, represents a
mixture of pottery types since it hau the pollshvd surface and engra~’ed decoration of
the polish~ and cngravt~l ware as see~ in I8 and 19, 20 ~l)l)ears to be a trade piece.
Sit~ alioeatlan:
thin county, 5-$,

1-S. 10-15. IS-19 Clement site: all others
and 1~ are all f~om :~ s~ng~e b~rial.

13

Macl)onald site.

S~ecimens 13 through 20 are t /6 act~al size : all others are 1/3 size.

McCur-

A Survey

o~

Oklahoma Archaeology

For other aspects of the material culture of this group the
specimens found in the excavations of the Clement site
will be used. These do not markedly deviate from those
of the McDonald site and present a greater variety
and richness of form. This greater variation suggests the
possibility that while the two sites overlap in time, some
temporal phases are present at the Clement site which are
lacking at the other site. Aside from the pottery vessels,
other artifacts of clay include perforated pottery discs and
pipes. The pipes are present in two forms. One is a thick
walled, bi-conical elbow pipe. One specimen has a shieldshaped area applied at the base of the bowl and decorated
with reed punctate impressions. The other form has a small
conical bowl with a thin stem, and in one instance there is
a stem extension which was bent upward and plastered on
the bowl.
The ground and polished stone complex includes manos
and metates with an elliptical grinding surface. Celts occur
in two shapes. One has a petaloid outline and a pointed
poll. The more common form is small and elongated and
is usually quite irregular in outline since the implement was
ground only in the area about the cutting edge. It was
noted that the cutting edge was normally placed at the
smaller end of the implement. The single pair of stone ear
spools was found with the burial in the temple mound.
Each spool has a concave face covered with a copper sheath,
and the inner flange is divided into two sections by a broad
transverse groove.
Chipped stone implements, while abundant, occur in a
limited series of forms. A few roughly flaked hoes with
a pear-shaped outline were present as were a few knives
and scrapers with ovate and asymetrical outlines. Projectile
points were the most abundant, and these are represented by
a var}ety of shapes. The most common projectile points are
of a large size, 35 mm., to 84 mm., in length and have a
rounded stem, contracting to the base; some of the larger
ones were doubtless used as knives. Usually there is no
distinct shoulder area. The materials utilized for this type
include white, black, brown and red chert and more rarely

Texas Archaeologica! and Paleontological Society

60

:

o

o

#:

o

-~

o

o

:

o

f’:t’J’~CJJ ’"° ° °

o

o°°

Prehistoric House Patterns in Oklahoma.
Scale: .A.]I ~atterns reduced to the same scale.
Site and focus alloemtlon :
LfEvIII.--Spiro focus, Evans site, Le Flore county.
LfBo I.--Fort Coffee focus, Bowman site, Le Flore county.
LfCt II.--Fort Coffee focus, Choates site, Le Flore county+
MsHu H.--Sptro focus, Hughes site, Muskogee county.
BrMa L--Bryan focus, Marts site, Bryan county.
LfCt II.--S~)iro focus, Choates site, Le Flore county.
BrMaIII.--Bryan focus, Marts site, Bryan county+
McMd II.--McCurtain focus, MacDonald site, MeCurtain county.
McC
IL--McCurtain focus, Clement site, MeCurtain county.

:

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

grey or brown quartzite.

61

A second type has a blade that

approaches an equilateral triangle in shape and contrasts
with the more elongated blade of the preceding type.

It has

a large squared stem which is frequently as long as the
blade. The materials are commor~ly grey quartzite and more
rarely translucent grey, white and red chert or chalcedony.
The length ranges between 35 mm. and 47 mm., and the
flaking is comparatively coarse.

Several other, types of

large points occur, though not in great abundance.

These

include points with a parallel sided stem or expanding
stem, and a notched type with deep notches originating in
the basal area.

Small points ranging in length between

15 ram. and 38 ram. are also present in a variety of forms,
frequently with a serrated blade.

They represent distinct

types; one has a recurred blade and a distinct stem, and
another is a triangular type with corner notches. The materials of the small points are generally varieties of chert,
quartz or quartzite.
The two excavated sites of the McCurtain focus appear
to represent a considerable span of time. A few bottles,
probably trade pieces, have the globular neck and closely
spaced, broad incising characteristic of the Glendora focus,
the historic Caddo complex. However, the practice of building temple mounds, the use of rectangular houses, some
burial traits and artifacts are reminiscent of Spiro focus
types and suggest an earlier time period. It should be
stressed that this is doubtless indicative of a sequence of
cultural remains, not a mingling of diverse materials at the
same time period. The greater part of the material here
grouped as the McCurtain focus is extremely close to the
remains designated in Texas as the Texarkana focus.
spite this, there are differences. Rather than to obscure
classifactory units by broadening the definition of the
Texas focus, it seems advisable to retain a distinct name for
the Oklahoma material until the temporal phases of the
components are clarified by careful analysis and, similarly,
until the Texas material is defined with greater precision.

The Fort Co]fee Focus
A series of late prehistoric sites from Le Flore county ir~
eastern Oklahoma has been grouped together and designated
as the Fort Coffee focus by K. G. Orr.’° This focus includes
the Gertrude Bowman, Granville Bowman, Skidgel, Moore,
Littlefield No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3, Pratt, Choates and Holt
sites. The two Bowman sites and Skidgel are grouped
together and treated as a single unit, Fort Coffee. Orr has
noted minor differences between certain of these sites and
suggests that some are older than others. He suggests that
the Littlefield site is earliest, the Moore site intermediate
and the Fort Coffee unit most recent. The entire focus is
interpreted as representing the final expression of a long
period of cultural development within the Spiro region.
Krieger considers the Fort Coffee focus as representing
the Fulton Aspect and hence related to other loci in the
general "Caddoan" area.’I Other Fulton Aspect cultures
are Texarkana, Titus, Frankston, Belcher, Bossier, Glendora
and McCurtain.
The Fort Coffee sites are represented by villages and
burial grounds; no mounds are known. The villages are
marked by house sites, refuse pits, cemeteries and village
debris. Several houses have been excavated; they are rectangular in shape with two central roof supports and a narrow passageway entrance. The house commonly had a
baked clay floor and a centrally located fireplace. In some
instances small cache or storage pits were present within the
house.
Circular refuse pits were also found scattered
throughout the village area.
Burials are commonly clustered in a limited area of the
village representing a cemetery. The graves are represented by pits dug into the cemetery area and include individual primary burials. The burials are predominantly in
a semi-flexed position although some fully extended individuals are found at most sites. Grave offerings are
10.
11.

Orr, Kenneth G., or,. tit.
Krieger, Alex, op. eft.

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

present and are usually pottery vessels placed near the head.
An occv~ional stone or flint artifact is found, but such associations are rather rare.
Pottery is the most abundant material from the Fort
Coffee sites. The typical pottery is a brown or red-orange
colored ware which has been tempered with crushed mussel
shell. Very often the shell has leached out leaving a porous
and fragile appearing pottery. Common vessel forms are
deep globular jars with slightly flaring necks and conical
or hemispherical bowls. Bottles and other forms are present but are not plentiful. Decorations are represented by
relatively simple designs which may be incised, engraved
or impressed with the finger nail. Lip nodes, tabs and lugs
are common embellishments. Linear design elements are
most frequent and are represented by chevrons or crosshatching. In addition to pottery vessels, simple elbow pipes
of clay are reported.
Chipped flint objects include arrowheads, blades or knives,
drills and scrapers. The most common arrowheads are
small triangular shaped points either with or without side
notches. In addition, there are some small stemmed arrow
points and a few large projectile points. The larger points
are commonly stemmed and taper toward the base. Orr also
reports large barbed points with an expanded base. Large
oval or diamond-shaped beveled knives are typical of the
Fort Coffee sites. These are commonly beveled on alternate
sides and are skillfully chipped. Flint drills or perforators
~re represented by two types: a short expanded base drill,
and a long slender ensiform drill pointed at each end. This
latter type is commonly four or five inches in length and
may have served some purpose other than as a drill. Flint
scrapers are the small snub-nosed or end scraper variety
but are not abundant.
Artifacts of ground stone include long elliptical shaped
celts, rectangular mullets which may or may not have pi~s,
grinding stones, pecking hammers, hammerstones, grooved
sandstone arrowshaft smoothers, cylindrical beads and
pipes. The stone pipes are of the elbow variety but corn-

64

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

monly have a rather tall bowl which is two or three times
as long as the stem.
Bone and shell materials are not especially abundant in
the Fort Coffee sites; bone awls or perforating tools and
bison scapula hoes are most common. Complete terrapin
shells have been found associated with burials, and it is
suggested that these may have been "rattles." Tubular
shell beads and perforated mussel shells, presumably used
as hoes, were found at the Moore site.
Other miscellaneous materials considered as a part of
the complex are crudely chipped stone hoes and pigments.
Red paint in the form of limonite has been found at ~hree
sites. Charred corn has also been found in the excavations.
Rather widespread contacts by the Fort Coffee people
is suggested by the discovery of turquois beads at the Moore
site. This material most certainly came from the west,
probably somewhere in New Mexico, as a trade item.
The distribution of the Fort Coffee materials is not known
although it apparently represents one example of a late
prehistoric people to be found throughout eastern Oklahoma.
A more detailed report must await analysis of the available excavated materials.
The Searcy Component
The Searcy materials are represented by a single excavation reported upon by Mr. 3. Joe Bauxar.,2 The Searcy
complex represents an element intrusive into the older Gibson Aspect. At this time, the Searcy component is represented by a series of intrusive burials which had been interred in mound Unit III at the Norman site on Grand River
in Wagoner county, Oklahoma.
The Norman site is a large mound group belonging to the
Gibson Aspect of eastern Oklahoma. In excavating one of
the domicilliary mounds, designated Unit III, a large number of intrusive pit burials were found. These pit burials
12. Manuscript on file at Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma.

Fort COffee focus artifacts.

PLATE

PO//e.r~- vessels

. are 1 /6 act~a] size

A Survey oS Oktahoma Archaeology

67

were obviously not as old as the mound into which the
pits had been dug, and, since the associated pottery vessels
were different from those in other parts of the Norman site,
Bauxar felt justified in dealing with the material separately.
Whether the Searcy materials represent an unrelated people
who later lived on the Norman site or whether they represent a decadent survival of the earlier Norman peoples
remains to be answered.
The Searcy component is represented entirely by burials
and various associated grave offerings. No houses, mounds
or village materials are known. The burials were placed
in oval shaped pits dug, apparently from the top surface
of the mound, into the mound earth. The burials were in
a flexed or semi-flexed position; the size of the grave was
merely large enough to accommodate the body. The burial
pits were oval in outline with vertical walls and a flat bottom. The average size appeared to be about two or two
and one-half feet wide, three or three and one-half feet
long and from one to three feet in depth.
The condition of the burials varied considerably. Some
skeletons were in a good state of preservation while others
were represented only by fragments of the skull.
The graves had apparently been dug without any attempt
at arranging them in any special manner and were scattered
throughout the southeastern quarter of the mound. Some
attempt was apparently made to orient the position of the
body since many of the burials were placed on the right side
with the head toward the northwest. Burial offerings were
found in about one-half of the graves; pottery vessels were
the most common association. In most cases where burial
offerings had been made, a single pottery vessel was placed
near the head. Other grave goods included flint knife
blades, flint scrapers, flakes of flint, a clay elbow pipe,
grinding stones or mullers, a stone celt, a pair of arrowshaft
abraiders, a terrapin shell, a mussel shell and miscellaneous
fragments of animal bone.
The Searcy pottery consists of a single homogeneous ware
which resembles one variety associated with the Norman

68

Te~a~ A~’chaeologic~ a~:~ Pa~eo~to~ogic~ Socle~j

component; the differentiating characteristic is a difference
in vessel form. The Searcy pottery is an undecorated shell
tempered ware of poor or mediocre workmanship. Common
vessel forms are jars and bowls; bottles are represented by
a single specimen. The pottery jars are small in size, globular
in shape, have a wide shoulder and short neck, which may
be slightly flared. The bowl shaped vessels display a greater
variety ranging from those having almost straight sides to
those resembling a flattened sphere in outline. One vessel
has two opposing small rounded projections rising vertically
from the lip of the bowl.
Chipped flint objects include knife blades, a variety of
scrapers and miscellaneous worked and unworked flakes.
The knives are well made, thin in cross-section and oval
to lanceolate in outline: They range in size from four to
eight inches in length. The flint scrapers represented are
of the small snub-nosed type or the type made from a flint
flake which has been retouched along one or two sides to
produce a scraping edge. Several graves produced spalls
of flint which appeared unworked; apparently these were
to be utilized for making implements, or they served as
tools requiring no secondary chipping. It is interesting that
no projectile points were found.
Objects of ground stone include a single celt, a pair of
grooved sandstone abraiders which were presumably used
as arrowshaft smoothers, and a small bifaced muller or
grinding stone.
A single elbow pipe of clay is reported, but it is not
available for description.
Although no bone or shell artifacts were found, miscellaneous fragments suggest that food offerings had been
placed with the dead. One large mussel shell and a terrapin
carapice had been placed in pottery containers, and concentrations of bone fragments were sometimes found near
the skeleton.
Bauxar believes that there is a definite time gap represented between the Norman and Searcy components at the

PLATE 12
Searcy compone~t artifacts.
Potter,. vessels (1, 3. 7) : stone celt 12) : sandstone arrowshaft smw)ther
knives (5. 9) : flint side scrapers (6.
Site allocation: All sl)ecimens are
man site, Wagoner county.
All specimens arc 1/3 size,

from

the intrusive burial complex

(4) ; flint

at the Nor-

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

71

Norman site. In comparing the Searcy complex with other
archaeological horizons in the state, he notes a similarity
to the Fort Coffee focus materials. The relationship, however, will remain uncertain until such time as more data
becomes available for both the Searcy and Fort Coffee
materials.
The Neosho Focus
The uppermost levels of the bluff shelters in the northeastern portion of the state contain an abundance of shell
tempered pottery that probably represents the latest prehistoric occupation of this region. Some of this material
has in the past been designated the "Top-Layer" culture
of the Ozark Bluff shelters. More extensive excavation in
the shelters, however, indicates that a considerable variety
of material has been grouped under this heading. It seems
evident, at least so far as Oklahoma is concerned, that several[
closely related complexes, for the most part having affinities
with the Upper Mississippian phase, are found in these sites.
Like the earlier Woodland cultures in this same area, then,
the cultural remains indicate a migration of peoples from the
north who occupied the northeastern portion of the state
and whose influence may well have affected the cultures
in the more southerly sections.
One of the important complexes in these late deposits,
which are late prehistoric, has been designated the Neosho
focus. Because of the presence of several complexes, the
segregation of a single cultural manifestation is a difficult
problem if only the bluff shelters are utilized. However,
the Neosho focus is also represented at a single village site,
the Mode site (D1MdI). The village site does not appear to
be identical to the cultural remains found in the shelters,
but the same general pottery type is found in both and
serves as the major diagnostic feature of the complex. This
pottery is tempered with particles of crushed shell ranging
up to .6 cm. in size. Although vessel surfaces are smoothed
and occasionally have a slight lustre, the particles of temper
protrude and give a speckled appearance. The ware is of
medium thickness ranging between .6 cm. and .9 cm., and

72

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

surface colors include greys and variations of light orange
and red with mottling frequent on any single vessel. A
globular jar with flat base and a short vertical, flaring or
recurred rim appears to be most common. Wide mouthed
and convex-sided bowls are also present. The decoration
found on this ware indicates its relative freedom from the
influences of other pottery types found in Oklahoma. The
commonest decorative elements are wedge-shaped punctate
impressions and broad incised lines. Fine incised lines and
short incisions are also present. The lips of the vessels are
frequently decorated, either by notches or punctate impressions. Decoration on the rim and shoulder include herringbone patterns of wedge-shaped punctates, a series of vertical or horizontal punctates, broad incised lines bordered by
punctate impressions placed parallel or diagonally to
the lines, alternate incised lines and punctate impressions,
and opposed series of diagonal incised lines. Strap and loop
handles are frequent on the jars, and these, too, often bear a
decoration of punctate impressions. Miniature vessels and
a large elbow pipe with bowl and stem of nearly equal
diameter are other items of pottery.
The chipped stone complex includes both small triangular
points, either unnotched or with horizonta! side notches,
and large stemmed and notched points. End scrapers are
carefully retouched and are either diminutive thumbnail
scrapers or larger forms. Side scrapers, as well as drills,
are also present. The most distinctive form in chipped
stone is the rhombic or diamond shaped knife with an alterhate beve! on the edges. The Mode site, but not the bluff
shelters, contained double-bitted axes of chipped stone. In
polished and ground stone, large petaloid shaped celts were
found at the Mode site, and smaller and proportionately
broader celts were found at the bluff shelters. Grooved
abraiding stones with deep V-shaped grooves, which were
used in the manufacture of bone implements, were found as
well as those having broader U-shaped grooves, which were
probably used in finishing arrow shafts. In the preparation
of flour from corn both long, narrow loaf-shaped manos and
flat elliptical manos were used. Shells were used for the

PLATE 1.3
Nt~sho focus artifacts.
Sherds of Nessho Punctuate type (1-7) : miniature vessel (8) : strap handle, Neo~hu
Puncture ware (9); projectile i~oint.~ (10-11. 1~-16); mussel shell scraper (13):
grooved arrowshaft ahraider (14): flint end scraper (17); knives (18-t9); 18
a diamond.shalaed alternate beveled tyl~e: bone awls (20. 22-2:$); bone shaft wrench
(21) : stone celt (24); do~*ble-blt~ a~e
Site allocation: 1-4, 7-11, 18, 21-22 Cul~p site, Unit II; 5-6, 13, 15.16. 19-20 Evans
~ite, Unit II; 12. 14, 23-24 Mode Site; 17 Cooper site, Unit VL
All sites ~re iv
Delaware county.
All speeFmens are ] /3 size.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma ArchaeoZogy

manufacture of small disc-shaped beads, for scrapers, and
were perforated for use as a hoe. Bone awls were manufactured from splinters of animal long bone and from deer
ulnae and deer cannon bones with the condyles used as a
handle. Beads were also manufactured from cylindrical
sections of bird bone.
Though some cache pits were found at the village site,
no trace Of a permanent house structure was discovered.
This perhaps explains the popularity of the bluff shelters.
The shelters were also used for burial purposes and commonly contained individual partially flexed burials; a single
group burial was encountered. The burials rarely had
grave goods but the occurrence of pottery vessels, bone awls,
and red pigment has been noted.
The Washi~a River Focus
Throughout the central portion of Oklahoma along the
Washita River in Garvin and Grady counties, several village
sites representing a typical eastern Plains hunting-agricultural economy have been examined. The complex of traits
present is herein referred to as the Washita River focus and
appears to represent a late prehistoric horizon resembling
the Henrietta focus of northern Texas and the Paint Creek
culture of Kansas. Several sites appear typical of the
Washita River culture; among these the Grant, Braden,
Lee, Lacey, Frankenburg and Brown sites are best known.
The Washita River sites are usually located on a terrace
adjacent to the river or upon a nearby promontory overlooking the valley. The villages are marked by considerable
village debris including occasional artifacts, broken bones
and shell, flint chips, pottery sherds, wattle or other refuse
from occupation.
Excavation at some of the villages revealed house sites,
a number of refuse pits, an occasional burial and various
artifacts. The most common features found in the village
area were the circular pits which normally contained an
abundance of village debris. These probably served originally as storage or cache pits and were later used as a con-

Texas ArchaeoIogical and Paleontological Society

venient place to dispose of refuse. Most of these pits were
circular in outline and averaged between three and five feet
in diameter and three or four feet in depth. The pits usually
contained an abundance of animal bones, fragments of pottery and broken or discarded artifacts.
Lynn Howard, who excavated the Braden site, reports that
the houses are similar to those of the Bryan focus: These
houses were square in outline having four central roof supports and an extended passageway entrance. A prepared
clay floor and fire basin, as well as cache pits, appeared as
features within the houses.
Several burials have been excavated, and they are in a
flexed or semi-flexed position and usually without grave
offerings.
The economy of the Washita River people was based upon
hunting and agriculture. Among the animal bones identified are bison, deer, jack rabbit, terrapin and wild turkey.
Freshwater mussels, turtles and fish are also represented.
Evidence for agriculture is demonstrated by the discovery
of corn and beans.
One characteristic of the Washita River sites is the
relative abundance of bone artifacts. Many of these have a
highly polished surface indicating extensive use. Bone digging implements are abundant, the scapula hoe being most
common. The scapula hoe is characterized by an open
socket which aids in securing the handle. Another type of
hoe is that made from a bison skull in which the split
horn core serves as a handle for a blade and is cut from the
attached skull case. Perforated digging stick points cut
from a bison tibia are also quite common. Skin working
tools include various types of bone awls and needles. The
beamer or drawknife type of fleshing tool is also represented.
Arrowshaft wrenches are made from sections of rather
large bones in which a large perforation has been made
through the shaft. In most cases the edges of the perforation
are highly worn and polished from use. Flint flaking tools
and punches of antler are represented by several specimens,
and several notched or grooved bones suggesting the musical

PI,ATE 14

Wasblta River focus articafL~,

ine.~

(4) ;

perforated

~ne uwla
beveled knife
Site allocation: All s~ecimens from slt~ in Garvln count)’: ~e, Grant or Br~den.
Sp~tmens
13 anti 15 are l /3 size; all others are 1/6 actuttl ~ize.

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

rasp occur. Objects of adornment include tubular bone
beads and small perforated pendants made from flat bone
fragments. Additional bone artifacts are highly polished
animal jaws and worked pieces of bone which resemble
dice or the "counters" of some present day Indian gambling
games.
Chipped flint objects from the Washita River sites are
best represented by small arrowheads. Although a variety
of shapes are to be found, the majority are triangular in
outline with side notches at the base. Specimens are usually less than one inch in length and skillfully chipped from
a wide variety of colorful materials. Occasionally a large
sized arrowhead or dart point will be found; whether these
represent an integral part of the complex or something from
a different people remains unanswered.
Flint knives are represented by several types including a
triangular form, an oval leaf-shaped form and the diamondshaped beveled form. The beveled knives seem to be typical of many sites, and they are similar to those commonly
found throughout the Great Plains area.
Scrapers are
common and include three types: the snub-nosed scraper,
the side scraper and the flake scraper. The flake scrapers
are very abundant and are represented by flint flakes which
were utilized as scraping tools, the scraping process having
removed tiny flakes along the scraping edge.
Some
examples of flint drills or perforators exist although they are
not common. The Washita River sites also produce miscellaneous objects of flint which are difficult to classify. These
include crudely made objects which may have served as
knives or scrapers, turtleback cores and unfinished articles.
Probably the most common stone artifacts are small
pieces of sandstone marked by grooves or deep incisions.
These objects are usually loaf-shaped and have one or several
grooves cut into the surfaces of the stone. Some of the
grooves are angular as though used to sharpen a pointed
implement; others are rounded in order to receive one-half
of an arrowshaft or stick. Stone celts are found in the
Washita River complex; these are ground and polished with

80

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

a round or oval cross-section tapering to a pointed or
rounded poll. An occasional stone pipe has been found, and
all specimens represent a small elbow type of pipe.

Other

stone artifacts include simple stone pendants, mullers and
grinding basins, various hammerstones, and irregular pieces
of hematite, presumably utilized as a pigment.
Although mussel shells were found throughout the village
debris, artifacts of shell are quite rare. Examples of a shell
pendant, a snail shell bead and a perforated mussel shell
hoe appear among the specimens.
Clay materials are represented by small figurines, elbow
pipes, perforated discs and pottery vessels. The figurines
are small in size and are rather crudely made. They appear
to represent simplified figures of the human body. The
clay pipes are of the elbow variety and are similar to those
made of stone. Pipes are not common at any site yet
examined and are represented largely by various fragments.
Several specimens of perforated discs, commonly termed
spindle whorls, have been found. These are made from a
broken sherd of pottery, cut into a circular disc and perforated through the center.
By far the most common articles to be found in the
Washita River villages are fragments of pottery. Complete vessels are scarce although many large sherds offer
evidence as to the vessel form. A typical vessel is represented by a deep globular jar with a straight or flaring rim.
The base may be rounded or have a fiat disc-like bottom.
Examples of ornamentation are handles, lugs and applique
designs applied to the surface. The pottery, in general, is
a grey or brown colored ware, rather crudely made, thick
and poorly baked. The tempering material varies considerably and includes crushed mussel shells, crumbled limestone, sandstone and bone. The vessel surface is ordinarily
smooth although examples of a cord impressed surface are
found at most sites. The pottery appears as a heterogeneous mixture, and further research must be done in order to
understand the implications of the varied material.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

81

The Washita River focus is apparently late in time
although no post-Columbian or contact materials have been
discovered. Similar materials are found throughout most
sections of central Oklahoma, and related cultures exist in
Kansas and Texas. As more research is done, it may be
found that the Washita River materials have a greater
antiquity than now suspected and that they occupied the
region for several centuries. Possible age differences
may be obscured by similar cultural comp!exes which repo
resent adjustments to a similar type of environment.
The Custer Focus
Several prehistoric sites from west-central Oklahoma have
been tentatively grouped together to represent the Custer
focus. All of the sites are located in the Washita River valley
in Custer county and share similar cultural characteristics.
The Custer materials may represent an extension of the
Washita River focus peoples who pressed westward toward
the High Plains. Since the Custer county sites are not
identical to the Washita River materials (Garvin county),
it seems desirable to consider them as representing a separate focus. Additional work in the territory between the two
localities should aid in understanding their actual relationship.
Excavation or testing has been carried out at the followLug sites: Goodman I, Goodman II, Shahan I, Shahan II, McLaughlin I, McLaughlin II and Williams. The most extensive work has been done at Goodman I; Williams is represented only by surface collections. All other sites have been
subjected to test pits or minor excavations.
The structure of the Custer focus houses is Lucompletely
known at this time. The houses are apparently square or
rectangular in outline with four central roof supports. The
interior is marked by a centrally located fireplace and
irregularly placed cache pits. The abundance of burnt clay
indicates a wattle and daub type of construction.
The villages are characterized by scattered cache or refuse
pits. These are round or oval shaped pits dug into the

Te~a A~ch~eo~ogica~ a~d P~eo~to~o~ica~

82

ground surface for a depth of three to five feet.

Although

presumably used for storage, most of the pits contained
refuse when excavated.
The burial practices are poorly known although two
graves have been uncovered at the Goodman I site.

The

burials were flexed and placed in a round or oval grave
pit.

Both burials contained grave offerings in association.

Chipped flint artifacts are represented by projectile points,
knives, drills and scrapers. The projectile points are typically small triangular shaped points which may or may
not have side notches. The alternate-beveled diamondshaped knife and simple ovate forms are common examples
of cutting implements. Scrapers are plentiful with both
end and side scrapers being represented. Many of the
scraping tools are merely simple flint flakes having small
chips removed along one side or end. One scraping tool is
distinctive in that the working end of the implement i~
pointed or triangular shaped resembling a "beaked" type
scraper.
Grinding stones are represented by manos and metates.
Other stone objects include grooved sandstone awl sharpeners, arrowshaft smoothers and pipes. The stone pipes are
small, equal armed elbow pipes having a slightly bulghug
bowl and stem. The stem is sometimes decorated by a
grooved ring or by notches which extend around the shank
of the pipe.
Objects of bone are plentiful on most sites and include
bison scapula hoes, bison tibia digging stick points or
fleshers, awls or perforating tools, antler flaking tools,
tubular beads and notched rib bones resembling the musical
rasp. All of these items are similar to bone artifacts found
throughout the Plains area and appear to have no distinctive
features as far as the Custer county area is concerned.
The only shell specimens found are small olivela shell
beads and unworked mussel shells, which may have been
utilized as scrapers or spoons.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

Clay objects include perforated sherds, figurine fragments and pottery. The pottery is predominantly of two
types: Stafford Plain and Stafford Cordmarked. The two
wares are essentially the same except for the surface
treatment; one is a plain smoothed ware and the other
is marked by cord impressions. The tempering material is
caliche although small amounts of grit, sand, limestone,
clay, shell or bone may be included. Vessel forms are deep
conical jars which have a small rounded or flattened base
and a flaring rim. Attached features are represented by
handles and small tab like projections rising vertically from
the rim. The pottery resembles the common utility ware
Lindsay Plain from the Washita River focus except for the
caliche tempering and the greater abundance of cord-marked
sherds. Some small sherds having finger-nail punctates
straight incised lines have been found at one or two sites, but
the source of this material is not known.
The Custer county focus appears to represent a late prehistoric agricultural and hunting people who are most
similar to the Washita River peoples living further to the
east in central Oklahoma.
The Optima Focus
The Optima focus is found in the Oklahoma panhandle and
is represented by the Stamper site in Texas county near
Optima. A recent report by Virginia Watson presents the
available information concerning the focus.’3 At the present time, only one site has been examined although similar
sites are to be found in the general locality. The Stamper
site appears to be related to the Antelope Creek focus of
the Texas panhandle and the Upper Republican Aspect of
the Central Plains.
The Optima focus differs from other cultural groups herein described in that the houses are characterized by a row of
upright stone slabs which reinforce the wall construction.
13. Watson, Virginia, "The Ovtima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description
and Analysis." Texa~ Archaeclogical and Pal~ontolo~cal Society Bulletin 21, ~p. 7-68,
Sept. !950.

84

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

The houses are square or rectangular in floor plan with a
central fireplace and extended entrance passage. Some of
the unearthed structures have small attached rooms which
may have functioned as storage or work rooms.
Several burials have been found at the Stamper site,
and in each case the grave had been dug into the house
floor. The typical burial appears to be in a flexed position,
and grave offerings are not especially abundant.
Chipped stone artifacts from the Optima focus include
projectile points, knives, drills, scrapers and miscellaneous
broken or unfinished objects whose purpose remains obscure. The majority of all specimens have been manufactured from the multicolored alibates flint from the quarries along the Canadian River north of Amarillo, Texas.
The projectile points are commonly small, well chipped
triangular shaped points having side notches at the base. A
few specimens have an extra basal notch, and some are plain
triangular forms having no notching. The diamond-shaped
alternate-beveled knife is most typical ~0f the Stamper site
although slender oval or elliptical forms do occur. Many
of the flint flakes and pieces of worked flint were probably
used as knives or cutting tools. Flint drills are also fairly
common in the Optima focus. Some of the drills taper to a
drill point and may have been used as a combination drill and
reamer. The base varies considerably and appears to reflect
the original shape of the flake; only a few cases have a well
chipped and skillfully formed base. Flint scrapers are
abundant and are represented by well made piano-convex
snub-nosed types. Occasionally a flint flake was rechipped
along one end or side to produce a suitable scraping tool,
and many miscellaneous pieces of flint could have served as
scrapers.
Stone objects from the Stamper site include grinding
basins or metates, manos, hammerstones, sandstone awl
shapeners, arrowshaft smoothers, celts and pipes. Grains
were crushed and ground in circular or oval shaped stone
basins by use of an oval or rectangular muller. Hammerstones are represented by rounded or globular shaped peck-

|’LAT~ 15
Optima focus artifacts.
Bone digging stick point with portion of wooden stick intact {I) ; sandstone arrowshaft ~braider (2); stone pipes (3); tume awls (4); flint knives (5-6); three flint
side ~cravers (~) : three end scravers {8) ; projectile point tyl~es {9) : pottery sherds,
Stamper Coz’dmarked (10, 13) ; perforated l~ottery disc (ll) ; flint drills (12).
Site a|l~cation : Stam]~er si~e, Texa~ county.

All

specimens are 1 /3 size.

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

ing hammers commonly made of a quartzite pebble.

Sand-~

stone awl sharpeners and arrowshaft smoothers are represented by grooved blocks of sandstone containing longitudinal grooves extending across one or more surfaces.

The

only celt, small and of polished greenstone, is not too ~vell
made and exhibits a battered cutting edge and poll. The
stone pipes are small equal-armed elbow pipes made of fine
grained material, commonly with a bulging stem or bowl.
With the exception of manos or grinding stones, objects of
ground stone are not common.
Artifacts made from bone or antler are fairly common in
the Stamper site collections. Objects represented are bison
scapula hoes, digging stick points, awls or perforating tools,
spatulas, bone rasps, tapping tools and flakers. Agricultural
implements include the bison scapula hoe and the digging
stick point. The hoes are apparently similar to those found
throughout the general Plains area, although no evidence of
the halting method is present at the Stamper site. The digging stick points, sometimes called fleshers, are made from
bison tibiae which have been cut and perforated for halting.
Bone awls or punching tools are represented by a variety
of sizes and shapes, commonly made from a split deer bone
but also represented by sharpened splinters of bone.
Some awls are well shaped and carefully manufactured
while others indicate careless or hasty execution. Several
bison ribs with a series of deep notches cut across the flat
face of the bone have been found and have been termed
bone rasps because of their resemblance to the "musical
bone rasp" of some historic Indian tribes. Sections of deer
antler as well as antler tines are present and were apparently
used as tapping too]s or for chipping flint. Some flat paddle
shaped pieces of worked bone have been classified as
spatulas.
Shell objects are not common for the Optima focus
although scrapers, pendants and beads are represented.
Some complete mussel shells having worn edges were presumably used as scrapers or spoons. Simple perforated
pendants and disc beads were made of musseI shell, and

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

88

some beads have been made from the olivela shell by grinding off the spire.
Pottery from the Stamper site is remarkably uniform and
represents a single ware known as Stamper Cordmarked.
No complete vessels are known but the sherds suggest a
globular round bottomed jar having a straight or flaring
rim. The ware is utilitarian, dark colored, fairly thin and is
decorated with cord impressions over most of the outer surface. The clay has been tempered with grit, including mica
and sand, and the flecks of mica are commonly visible over
the vessel surfaces. Additional decorative features include
diagonal or circular punctates, commonly confined to the
neck or lip of the pot. No lugs or handles are represented
in the collections.
Small perforated pottery discs are also found at the site,
and in each case they have been made from a pottery sherd.
Other objects represented are small blocks of worked
hematite, which were presumably used as a source of red
pigment, charred corn cobs and burned fragments of coiled
basketry.
There is little doubt but that with additional excavations
more characteristics for the Optima focus would come to

light.
From the evidence now at hand, the Optima materials
appear to be closely related to the Antelope Creek focus in
Texas and apparently existed sometime during the period
from 1250 A. D. to 1450 A. D.
The Proto-Historic and Historic Horizons
Although white contact materials have been found in many
localities throughout Oklahoma, little work has been done to
identify the archaeological manifestations of historic tribes.
This is largely because known contact sites remain unexcavated and partly because of a difficulty in assigning specimens to a specific tribe. In addition, most of the various
tribes were removed to Oklahoma after considerable acculturation to white culture had taken place so that little

PI, ATE 16
Historic artifacts.
Cr~yk pottery vessel Melnto.~h Roughened (1): three rim sherds of Melntosh
P~ughened (2): Choctaw food I~wl
~3); six rim sher(~ of Mclnto~h Smooth~
4) ; bowl from hisN)ric grave, LfGai, Le Flore ~unty.
A tin eut~ was found
nside this pot (5); iron pipt~tomahawk from borial, Gaines Crt~k site 26, Eufaula
t~servolr (6).

j

Acknowledgments: specimen 3, Oklahoma Historlca] ~_~ciety
City ; specimen 6, W. O. Moody collection.
Specimen 1 is I /6 actual size; all others are i/;3 size.

Museum,

Oklahoma

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

in the way of aboriginal material remained.

91

With this loss

of distinctive aboriginal characteristics, the general similarities of historic trade materials makes it difficult to determine
the tribal affiliations.

At the present time, pottery appears

to be about the only item which is useful in identifying the
various groups, and it is by no means certain that these pottery wares are limited to the tribes to which they are
attributed. Materials which have been tentatively identified are Chilocco Historic, Creek, Choctaw and Chickasaw.
The Chilocco Historic materials refer to collections made
at one contact site in Kay county, Oklahoma. The site is
located near the confluence of Deer Creek and the Arkansas
River and may represent an outpost of early eighteenth century French traders. The various trade materials found at
the site suggest an occupation sometime between 1700 A. D.
and 1750 A.D. These specimens from the area include iron
hoes, axes, knives, and gun parts such as trigger guards,
gun barrels, butt plates and flint lock-mechanisms. Other
trade objects are glass and china beads, copper bells, copper
wire and copper cone shaped ornaments. Aboriginal specimens are represented by flint scrapers, bone awls and hoes,
stone awl sharpeners, clay pipes, and pottery, both plain
and incised. It is not possible to identify this material as
the product of any particular tribe at this time although
the Wichita appear as a reasonable choice since they were
residing in the state at that time.
Creek pottery has been identified and labled by two wares,
McIntosh Roughened and McIntosh Smoothed.~ Both wares
are to be found on historic Creek Indian sites throughou~
eastern Oklahoma. McIntosh Roughened is a plain colored,
brushed surface ware tempered with fine quartz sand or
grit. The complete vessels are large globular jars commonly
having a constricted neck and thickened lip. The lip may
have a line of simple notches or punctates extending around
the vessel. McIntosh Smoothed is a similar ware in so far
14.
Wenner,
David J.,
"Archaeologica!
Survey
unl)ublished manuscript on file at Devartment 9f
Oklahoma, Norman.

of the Eufaula
Reservoir,"
Anthropology, University of

92

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

as the paste and tempering is concerned; it is a smooth surfaced ware, normally thinner and more carefully made.
Decorations are represented by incised parallel lines placed
either parallel or diagonal with the rim and limited to the
upper portion of the vessel. These designs have commonly
been smoothed over and are partly obliterated by the
smoothing process in some areas. Although the vessel forms
are not well known, deep bowls with angular shoulders are
very common. Both of these wares are found on Creek sites
along with trade materials such as metals, crockery, china
and glass of historic times. The wares were presumably
brought into Oklahoma by the incoming Creeks and would
date sometime after 1832.
Choctaw pottery has been found at several localities in
the eastern part of the state, and several complete vessels are
preserved in the Oklahoma Historical Society ]VIuseum. The
distinctive ware is similar to that described by Ford~ and is
represented by small, black colored, highly polished food
bowls. The bowls are commonly decorated with a band of
three or four parallel lines produced with a comb like instrument. The decoration is applied to the upper part of
the bowl and is limited to rather simple designs.
The Choctaw also made a plain shell tempered utility
ware although it does not appear to be as distinctive as that
mentioned above.
Chickasaw pottery has been identified at four excavated
sites containing white trade materials. All of the sites are in
Bryan county and include the following: Novotny, Vaden,
White and Opel sites. Kassel has identified five wares which
are attributed to the Chicksaw. Rock Creek Brushed, Rock
Creek Plain, White Brushed, White Plain and Vaden Plain.16
The wares resemble the Chickasaw Ridge Plain identified
by Jennings in Mississippi.’7
15. Ford, .}’ames A., Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections From Louisiana
and Mississippi, Anthrol)ologica! Study No. 2, Louisiana Geological Survey, New
Orleans, 1936.
16.
Kassel, E. Marilyn. An Analysto of Archaeological Material Attributed to the
Chickasav¢~.
M. A. thesis, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 1949.
17. Jennlnge, Jess D., "Chickasaws and Earlier Indian Cultures of Northeast
Mississippi," Journal of Mississippi History, VoL III, No. 3, July, 1941.

l~Multi~le burial

¯

~-~Sem~.f/exe~"~’.~+: ~elson focu~--t~, ~acDo~a]d
~+e~ed buriaJ

~.~s~lo focus, ~t~+,~ ~e ~te, Le F~e’ Garvin county
.... ~,ma focus. ~+.=~" .~[~. Unit II
~0~ ~Unty.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

9~

Rock Creek Plain is the most abundant ware and is represented at all sites by a smooth brown or grey colored pottery tempered with fine sand, charcoal and sandstone. Vessel forms are globular with a flattened base and a slightly
flaring rim. Some fragmentary vessels obviously indicate
native attempts to reproduce china tea cups.
All of the sites produced trade or contact materials such
as china, crockery, glass and various objects of metal. The
documentary evidence and the dating of the china ware
suggest an occupation during the middle part of the nineteenth century.~
Concluding Remark~
As stated in the introduction, the major objective of this
paper has been to present a brief summary of the kno~n
archaeological complexes in Oklahoma. While in part this
has been drawn from published sources, a large proportion
of the material has not as yet been presented in printed
form, not even in so brief a summary as this. Despite this,
the information has been utilized in the formulation of general trends and periods of cultural development for many
years, as the result of papers read at meetings and through
the examination of collections. Generalizations and broad
areal formulation have preceded the precise description of
cultural units that alone can provide a sound basis for such
interpretation. The reason for such an inversion of sound
procedure is not difficult to discover. Much of the archaeological work was conducted on an emergency basis; the information was recovered immediately prior to inundation
by water which was impounded by dams. Subsequently,
when published site reports might have been expected, the
work was interrupted by World War II with its consequent
dislocation of personnel and the cessation of such cuI~ral
activities. At the present time the work has been resumed,
but the primary task is still this initial phase of archaeo~logical research, the basic description of the varied cultural
units. Oklahoma, of course, is not alone in this position.
M~ny regions in adjacent states are also imperfectly
described.

96

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Still, it is possible to speak with greater assurance, at the
present time, of the sequence of cultural remains in the
area. While little light has been thrown on the Early
Hunting horizon, represented by such early projectile point
types as Clovis, Plainview and Folsom, the presence of at
least some comparable remains in the eastern as well as the
western portion of the state has been indicated. Much more
important, in terms of an early occupation, is the mounting
evidence for a long sequence of Archaic complexes in the
eastern portion of the state. Complexes which are primarily
represented by lithic remains which lack ceramics, and
which probably relied solely upon hunting and gathering
as a means of subsistence, are to be seen in both the Grove
focus and the early levels of the Fourche Maline focus.
While dating is as yet uncertain, remains of this complex
may well equal in antiquity some of the projectile point
types of the Early Hunting horizon. Subsequent to this
period, eastern Oklahoma was subjected to influences and
doubtless actual migration from several areas. A sequence
of Woodland cultures appears in the northeastern portion
of the state characterized by pottery types that show their
relationships to primary Woodland centers in the northern
Mississippi valley. The climax of this occupation is a ceramic phase of Hopewellian affiliations. Probably at about
the same time the Fourche Maline focus also received pottery, but affiliations are with the south and east.
Subsequent to this period the group of related cultures
known as the Gibson Aspect appear on the scene. During
this phase we are able to first recognize the Caddoan Area
as a cultural entity. Doubtless this was a phase of long
duration for the areal extent of affiliated cultures is greater
than in any subsequent time period; moreover, the specific
sites attain a size and complexity which is not again equalled.
The Gibson Aspect, then, represents a phase in which the
Caddoan Area achieves a cultural climax, when many large
burial mounds contain grave furniture of great richness and
marked aesthetic achievement. Furthermore, it is, despite
the presence of large quantities of trade material from wide
spread areas, a climax which is an internal development, not

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

97

a reflection of high cultural development elsewhere for it
bears a distinctive regional stamp. The focal point about
which this climax revolves would appear to be a religious
one. The major sites during its florescent peak are characterized not only by the large burial mounds and their elaborate grave furnishings but also by the truncated pyramidal
mounds with temples or ceremonial structures placed upon
them. Such centers appear to have drawn upon. a number
of subsidiary villages for their support.
Such features of the Gibson Aspect are in marked contrast to the Fulton Aspect, which follows it. While the
marked superiority in some technological processes, particularly ceramics, continues and perhaps is even surpassed,
in general the Fulton Aspect is marked by a decrease in cul-~
tural complexity. The discovery of the factors responsible.
for this decline, or at least for this transition, constitute one
of the most interesting problems of the Caddoan Area. The
Fulton Aspect appears to be marked by the decline in
portance of the older ceremonial centers and the graduaI
disappearance of both burial and temple mounds, with the"
latter persisting for a longer period. As a positive contribu-.
tion to this problem, it may be noted that in Oklahoma thereis a marked shrinkage in the Caddoan Area during the Fulton Aspect period. Such cultures as the Neosho focus of
Upper Mississippi affiliation appear in the northeastern portion of the state taking the place of an earlier Gibson Aspect
occupation. Complexes in the east-central portion of the
state, such as the Fort Coffee focus, can no longer be regarded as "pure" Caddoan units but show strong influences
from the Plains Area. The major ceramic types of the
Fulton Aspect appear to be largely derived from types and
decorative styles which evolved in more southernly portions
of the region, areas occupied by the McCurtain and Texarkana loci. It would appear that during Fulton Aspect
timesthe Caddoan Area on its northern frontier had been
subjected to increasing external pressure which resulted
in both the decrease in actual area occupied and the dilution
of the culture through the acceptance of many foreign innovations.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

98

The sequence of cultures is best known in the eastern por:tions of the state where the known archaeological phases of
Indian occupation ever~ embrace remains of the historic
tribes.

While some cultures have been defined for both the

~cer~tral and western portions, these remain for the most part
isolated units whose antecedents and final phases are as yet
unknown. On the whole, they reveal a far greater affiliation
with known sedentary cultures of the Plains, and it is possible that eventually they may be traced to a Woodland
base rather than to one of Southeastern affiliation. Central
Oklahoma represents the frontier of a cultural area con°
raining hybrid cultures requiring considerable work for
their elucidation. The hybrid nature of the far western cultures, particularly the Optima focus, is equally apparent.
In conclusion, it should be stressed that there are at present many geographic as well as temporal gaps in the summany of archaeological complexes here presented. Not only
do many additional units remain to be defined, but continued
analysis will doubtless reveal further local variants and
temporal phases of the complexes here presented.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baerreis, David A.
1951 The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern OkIahome, Anthropological Papers No. 6, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Baker, W. E., and A. V. Kidder
1937 "A Spear Thrower From Oklahoma," American
Antiquity Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 51-52.
Bell, Robert E.
1949 "Archaeological Excavations at the Harlan Site,
Fort Gibson Reservoir, Cherokee. County, Oklahoma,"
Plains ArchaeoIogica! Conference Newsletter, Vol. 3,
No. 1, pp. 3-15.

A Survey o] Oklahema Archaeology

99

Burnett, E. K. and Forrest E. Clements
1945 The Spiro Mound Collections in the Museum and
Historical Sketch oS the Spiro Mound, Contributions
from the Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. XI’V.
l~ord, James A.
1936 Analysis of Indian V{llage Site Collections From
Louisiana and Mississippi, Anthropological Study No. 2,
Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans.
Jennings, Jess D.
1941 "Chickasaws and Earlier Indian Cultures of l~ortheast Mississippi," Journal of Mississippi History, ~rol.
III, No. 3.
Kassel, E. Marilyn
1949 An Analysis of Archaeological Material Attributed
to the Chickasaws,~M. A. thesis, University of Oklahoma.
Krieger,

Alex D.

1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Norther~
Texas, University of Texas Publication No. 4640, Austin.
Newell, H. Perry and A!ex Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site Cherokee County, Texas,
Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 5.
Newkn_met, Phil J.
1940 "Preliminary Report on Excavations of the Williams Mound, Le Flore County, Oklahoma," The Oklahoma Pre-historian, Vol. III, No. 2, pp. 2-6.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1946 "The Archaeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma.
A Preliminary Report," American Antiquity, Vol. XI, No.
4, pp. 228-256.

10{}

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Renaud, E. B.
1930 "Prehistoric Cultures of the Cimarron Valley,
Northeastern New Mexico and Western Oklahoma,"
Colorado Scientific Society Proceedings, Vol. 12, No. 5,
pp. 113-150.
1930 "Les Plus Anciennes Cultures Prehistoriques du
Sudouest Americain," L’Anthropologie, Tome XL, No. 3
pp. 233-258.
Schmitt, Karl
1950 "The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County Oklahoma,"
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin No. 21, pp. 69-89.
Watson, Virginia
1950 "The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect. Description and Analysis," Texas Archaeological and PaleontologicaI Society Bulletin No. 21, pp. 7-68.

MASTODONS, MAMMOTHS, AND MAN
IN AMERICA
Hugo Gross
FOREWORD
Av,Ex D. K~nt
Dr. Gross is a German scholar of long experience in the
.problems of late Quaternary geology, climate, and paleontology
~n northern Europe. His interest in comparing the evidence
from Europe and North and South America for the time of
extinction of the mastodons and mammoths, and the age of the
archaeological remains associated with these animals, was
kindled by his tracing, in the museums of Germany, some of
the artifacts found in Missouri in 1838 by A. Koch, reportedly
associated with mastodon remains. We in America can greatly
benefit from the experience and perspective of Europeans in
these problems, for they have at their disposal a vastly greater,
highly integrated body of data derived from paleontology,
biology, geology, glaciology, pollen analysis, etc. in a much more
compact area. Our tentative geological datings for early cultural remains and the disappearance of now-extinct mammals
are derived from a few sites scattered over vast areas.
Although our perspectives are now improving rapidly with
more exact field reports and radiocarbon datings, comparisons
with European data should be of great additional value. Dr.
Gross has therefore consented to prepare thi~ article as a preliminary statement, to be enlarged and corrected by American
scholars, as further published material and ideas are made
available.
The manuscript I received from Dr. Gross in May has been
extensively re-written, with his approval. In view of ~he fact
that Dr. Gross, like many European scientists in recent years,
was working almost entirely with secondary American accounts and brief news releases in popular scientific journals
(due to the destruction of entire libraries during the war), %he
original manuscript seemed to me a remarkably well-balanced
treatment with shrewd insight into the strengths and weaknesses of each discovery and interpretation. Some sources not
available to him were entered in the text and bibliography,
but in order to keep the article to a reasonable length, no
attempt at complete documentation was made. To facilitate
future research on these intriguing problems, may I urge all
who read this article to forward to Dr. Gross any publications
you can spare which bear on these subjects in any way. His
address is: Kunigundendamm 59, Bamberg, Bavaria, Germany.

The problem of mastodon and elephant antiquity, and its
bearing on early prehistoric archaeology in America, has not
been solved satisfactorily. In 1935, John T. Sanford held

102

Texas Archaeo$ogica~ and Paleontological Society

that the Richmond mastodon skeleton in Indiana "is~ not
much over 5,000 years old and it may be considerably
younger than this."

Two years later the noted paleon-

tologist W. B. Scott maintained that many Pleistocene
mammals, including mastodons, "were in existence, only a
few centuries ago, in what is called historic times in the Old
World," because many a mastodon skeleton has been found
beneath only a few inches of peat.

Eiseley (1945) refutes

these datings, believing that the mastodon saw the recession of the ice-sheet from its outermost boundaries, but
that "his life span did not extend into the time of the
archaeologically known horizons." Yet Eiseley cannot date
the extinction of either mastodons or elephants in America.
Not a single mastodon site has yet been correctely dated
on geological evidence, stratigraphical research or pollen
analysis.
The latest comprehensive publications on early archaeology in America (Roberts, 1940; Wormington, 1949; Macgowan, 1950; Canals Frau, 1950) enumerate an astonishing
number of archaeological sites which have yielded remains
of Pleistocene proboscideans (mastodons and elephants),
implying both the contemporaneity of man with these mammals and the great antiquity of these sites. The first man
to maintain such a contemporaneity was a German immigrant, Albert C. Koch, more than a hundred years ago. He
is now forgotten in Germany but is often quoted in American papers and has recently been critically appreciated in
a meritorious treatise by Ashley-Montagu and Peterson
(1944). Not all of Koch’s data were correct (he was not a
trained paleontologist or geologist, but a trader in fossils),
but his observations were acute and cannot be ruled out for
this reason. They can be checked by his collections still
preserved at different museums, and his descriptions of the
circumstances of occurrence do not sound fictitious. Being
in a position to check some of Koch’s data, and having spent
many years in research in the late-glacial phenomena of
northern Germany (especially East Prussia), I take the
liberty of critically reviewing the investigations undertaken

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

in America to solve the problem indicated by the above
title, and of suggesting some re-examination.
The first site to yield a seeming primary association of
human artifacts and remains of an animal now extinct in
America was unearthed by Koch in the bottomlands of the
Bourbeuse River in Gasconade County, Missouri, in 1838.
At first it was taken for a mammoth (Koch, 1842), but later
(Koch, 1845, p. 68; 1857, 1860) it was ascribed to Mastodon
americanus.’ The skeleton was half-burned, covered by
plenty of ashes and cinders, and afterwards by a dark vegetal
mould eight to nine feet in thickness. Unfortunately an intermixture of bones found elsewhere in the region has perhaps slipped in, for Koch’s descriptions of the foot bones do
not agree with those of the mastodon, but rather (according
to the description by Stock, 1917) with those of the ground
sloth.~
Koch took for granted that ancient hunters killed this
mastodon mired in the clayey mud of the river bottom, tried
to destroy him by fire, and at last stoned and speared him
(for large stones were found upon and within the ash layer).
Curiously no one questioned this absurd conception of ancient hunters having annihilated .such a bulk of flesh in this
fashion; it is much more likely that a huge mastodon skeleton was found exposed, possibly by a spring freshet, and
Indians tried to destroy it by fire for superstitious reasons.
Such an interpretation may be substantiated by the notorious mastodon skeleton of Alangasi, Ecuador (Cuvieronius postremus) excavated in 1928 by the German F. Spillman, with the assistance for five days of the americanist
Max Uhle (Spillman, 1929 a, 1929 b; Uhle, 1930; Osborn,
1~: Koch ~1~57) stated : "The bones were snfficiently well preserved to enable me to
decide, l~ositiveIy, that they belonged to Mastodan giganteus ....
Some small
remains of the head were left unconsumed [by fire], but enough to show that they
belonged to the ~d:astodon."
2. Koch (1842) also ascribed" "toes armed with claws or nails" to his mastodon
from Benton County. Missourt:
However, his paper of 1845 refutes the belief that
"to Koch a ground sloth was as good as a mastodon."
He had excavated remains of
:Mylodon h~rlani and Megatherium before 1842 (Ashlsy-Montagu and Peter~on, 1944,
p. 412} and therefore cannot be suspected of not’ knowing the difference between
these remains.
Ashley-Montagu and Paterson arc mistaken in assuming that the
remains found by Koch in Ga,conade County were "almost certainly" those of tha
ground sloth Mylodon harIanl (Gravigrada).

104

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

1936, pp 566-572).

This skeleton (even the backbone) was

also found to be partly charred and covered by ashes, and the
underlying clay baked to a depth of 8 cm. Both Spillman and
Uhle maintained that Indians of the 2nd or 3rd century of the
Christian era had killed this mastodon (5 m. in length)
mired in the clayey mud of a valley bottom, and had roasted
it on the spot, without having cut it up.
It is curious that no one has yet refuted this idea.

The

Folsom hunters of 9,000 to 10,000 years ago are known to
have butchered the big bison they killed before consuming
the flesh (Roberts, 1936, pp. 15-16).

The late Aurignacian

hunters in Europe cut up mammoth game although their implements are scarcely superior to those of the Folsom
hunters; and most savages of today cut up their big game
before roasting it (confirmed by Prof. Krickeberg, personal
communication).
Thus, as in the case of Koch’s mastodon skeleton in Gasconade County, Missouri, the Indians at Alangasi apparently
found a huge fossil mastodon skeleton, perhaps exposed by
a spring freshet, and tried to destroy it by fire for superstitious reasons, then hurled stones, potsherds, and perhaps
other objects upon it.

Such a hypothesis might answer the

questions posed by Macgowan (1950, p. 145): "Although
there were no fewer than 152 broken pieces, they could
not be fitted into even one restored pot. Why? Further,
140 of these sherds were from a primitive type of pottery,
imperfectly fired, while 12 pieces were from an advanced
and decorated type which, in other locations, is supposed
to show Maya influence. Why should two varieties of potterywso widely separated in technique, and, presumably, in
age---appear at this one time?" The idea of magical destruction of an ancient skeleton by comparatively recent
Indians allows for the lapse of an unknown length of time
between the animal’s death and the deposition of the accompanying artifacts; the apparent association need not

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

105

have been a primary one.3 The Alangasi mastodon had two
healed injuries on the occiput, which suggested to Spillman
and Uhle that earlier hunters had wounded it, but such injuries might have been inflicted by the tusks of another
mastodon.
Koch (1860) indicated that he sold the skeletal remains,
stone artifacts,4 and soil samples from the Gasconade
County site to the Royal Museum of the University of Berlin. Prof. W. O. Dietrich, Director of the Museum fuer
Naturkunde in Berlin, was kind enough to search for them
at my request. He found numerous mastodon (not sloth)
bones and eight stone artifacts from Koch’s collections,
and sent the latter to me for examination. Four of these
(Plate 18, A, B, C, and D) are flint and inscribed "Missouri
Koch," as are the mastodon bones. The other four (Plate
18, E, F, G, and H) are chert and were sent by Prof. Dietrich "for the purpose of comparison"; they are labeled
"Feuersteinwaffen der Indianer. Harmann (?). Gasconade County, Mis., Nordamerika." "Harmann" is, of course,
the town of Hermann on the Missouri River more than 25
miles distant from the Bourbeuse River. All these artifacts show the same pressure flaking technique and little
evidence of the action of fire. Typological dating of such
a small assemblage is only possible by comparison with
ample collections in America.
I therefore sent photographs of Koch’s specimens to some American museums.
Miss H. M. Wormington, Curator of Archaeology at the
Denver Museum of Natural History, judged them as fol~
lows: "The artifacts do not resemble any of the earliest
forms. They are, however, very much like some of the
artifacts from some of the so-called Archaic levels. Farther
east some of these have been dated by the Carbon-14 method
3. A~ex D. Krieger. Archaeologist of the Unlversity of Texas, writes to me that
"’The controversy ha~ raged for ma.~y years whether the mastodon in Ecuador was
in primary a~soclatiop with the numerous potsherds found with it.
In view of
the ~otal situation in North and South America, I am extremely doubtful of such
an association with an extinct Pleistocene mammal."
4.
Koch described these as "Indian implements of war. as stone arrowheads,
tomahawks, etc .... a spear and axe, the spear corresponds precisely with our common Indian spear, the axe is different from any I have seen ..... broken spears,
¯axes, knives, etc."
They were found upon and within the ashes at the mastodon
site.

106

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

and the indications are that some of them may be more
than 5,000 years old."
Dr. 1t. G. Spier, Director of American Archaeology, University of .Missouri, kindly gave this opinion: "Our acquaintance with the earliest cultural horizons in 1Yiissouri
is still very slight, much poorer than for many other North
American areas. However, the artifacts which are said to
have been associated with the Mastodon remains (Plate
18, A, B, C, and D) bear general resemblance to artifacts
of the Hidden Valley Shelter Culture, a presumed early
culture in Jefferson County, Missouri. One of the other
points (Plate 18, G), photographed for comparison with the
Mastodon-associated artifacts, bears a strong resemblance
to a projectile point of the presumed early Dalton Culture of
Cole County, Missouri. .Jefferson and Cole County are
not far to. the east and west, respectively, of Gasconade
County. On the basis of these resemblances in the general
character of "the artifacts, I believe that it can be cateZ
gorically stated that the points (Plate 18, E, F, G, and H)
are ancient and are not the products of recent (19th century) Indians in Missouri."
Dr. Donald M. Johnson, Chief of Museum Division, Missouri 11esources Museum at Jefferson City, Missouri, kindly
gave me the following information: "Flint materials taken
from Jacob’s Cavern (three miles southeast of Pineville in
the southeastern corner of Missouri) are roughly identical
with the material in your photograph (Plate 18, A, B, C, and
D)."

The projectile points from this cavern were found in

the thick, loose cultural refuse (black earth) covering compact red clay. The excavators of 1921 found a partly decayed
left humerus of a Virginia (?) deer, the upper end broken

PLATE

18

A, B, C. and D, archaic spear points, first set inscribed "’Missouri Koch," found
by A. C. Koch in 1838 ul~on and wRhin the ashes covering a half burned mastodon

skeleton in Gas~onade County, Mo.
E, F. G. and ~’I, archaic chert spear points (second set) labelled "Feuerstoinwaffea
der Indianer, Harmann (?).
Gasconade County, Miso (Moo), lqordamerika."
They
were found together with the first set of A. B. C. and D. A]] are in the Geo]oglse~espalae~ntologisches Institut, Beriln.
I and J, archaic dart points from the site of the Richmond mastodon in Indiana,
Courtesy of the Buffalo Museu.m of Science,

PLAT~ 1~

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

109

and the lower end perforated from both sides. On this
bone are very primitive scratched designs of a mastodon on
one side, and of a bull moose and a "big river" on the other
~Allison, 1926, Figs. 20, 21). A physico-chemical examination by Allison (Idem,. p. 335) indicated that this bone and
its carvings must be far older than 3,000 years, and he conjectures that a minimum date would be 12,000 B. C. Unfortunately it was not found in an undisturbed layer, and
geological dating is impossible. The head of an Eskimotype harpoon of ivorys was found close by the carved
bone (D. M. Johnson, communication by letter). If Allison’s statement of authenticity is correct,s the mastodon
drawing from Jacob’s Cavern would be the only prehistoric representation of a mastodon in America, but it gives
no clue for measuring the lapse of time between the life
of this animal and the manufacture of the broad, stemmed
spear points similar to those found by Koch.
To Alex D. Krieger, Archaeologist, University of Texas,
am indebted for the following detailed information:
"As to the eight artifacts in your two photographs, all from Gasconade County, Missouri, it is my opinion that they do not represent any of the types which have been proved to be associated with
the mammoth, mastodon, sloth, or any other American mammal
now extinct. I can say without much hesitation that all of them are
typical of what we call the Archaic culture pattern of the whole
Easern United States region.
The broad projectile points with
broad stems are especially common in the Archaic pattern and
do not occur, so far as I know, in the late Pleistocene deposits on
the one hand, or continue very far into the earliest pottery cultures
on the other hand.
(In th,_’s terminology I am considering the end
of the Pleistocene to correspond with the beginning of the postglacial climatic optimum, probably about 5,000 B. C., more or less)
.... The earliest Archaic dates, as indicated by the radiocarbon
method, fall within the usual span given for the post-glacial optimum (about 5,000 to 2,000 B. C.), while the earliest pottery seems
~o belong entirely within a later period (variously termed the Neoglacial, Sub-Atlantic. Peat Bog, or Meditherma] age) which probably began about 2,000 B. C. Thus, I would think that all eight

5. This may be ’oompared with Plate 16
Collections, Vol. 100, 1940,

A, Fig. 6 in

Smithson|an

Miscellaneou~

6.
Dr. Frank I-I. It. Roberts, Jr., Associate Director, Bureau of
Ethnology, kindly writes that "’Most of the archaeologists in this country
studied the engraved bone from Jacob’s Cavern are of the opinion that the
of the mastodon is a fraud ....
A Ions review of Allison’s paper by N.
in which Nelson gives a number of reasons why he does not think the

American
who have
engraving
C. Nelson
mastodon

engraving is authentic was !~ub]ished in the American Anthro.nologlst, Vol. 30, No. 2,
1928." Nelson m~de a three-weeks excavation of his own at this site.

110

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

of the artifacts in your photographs would fall within roughly the
period between 4,000 and 2,000 B, C. They could, of course, come
somewhat later, but probably not much earlier.
"I think it is possible to state that there is no reliable evidence
that any of the large Pleistocene manunals survived the postglacial climatic optimum (now called by Antevs the Altitherma!
age in North America). Certainly there are many geological indications that great parts of North America were denuded during this
warm and arid period, the great grasslands widely destroyed, and
numerous lakes and small streams dried up. Such conditions
could account in large part for destruction of many large Pleistocene grazing animals, and the carnivores which preyed upon them.
"In conclusion, it is my opinion that the eight artifacts whizh
survive fr.om Koch’s Missouri collection are from a period at least
two or three thousand years later (and perhaps much more) than
the time of final extinction of the large mammals."

A clue in support of this opinion, as well as the dating of
Koch’s spear points, appears in the discovery of the Richmond mastodon in northeastern Indiana. The interpretation and dating published by Sanford (1935) who excavated these remains in 1930-31, must be considerably changed
according to European experience. The site, a small pond
drained long ago, is a shallow, roughly circular kettle-hole
sunk into giacio-fluvial outwash laid down in front of an
ice sheet half way between the Tazewe!l and Mankato
boundaries. The kettle-hole and pond therefore were gradually formed by the melting of an underlying lump of dead
ice. The beginning and completion of this process depended
upon the thickness and petrographic condition of the rubble sheath covering the dead ice block, and extended some
thousand years from the final period of the treeless tundra
(late glacial) phase up to the beginning of the post-glacial
warm period or optimum. In Europe this is demonstrated
by pollen-analysis, applying hydrofluoric acid to the oldest
n~ineral sediments, and computing the non-tree pollen
percentages. In North America the time of these phases was
perhaps somewhat shorter than in Europe.
The higher ground surrounding the kettle-hole had been
subject to prolonged weathering because the clay washed
from it by rain into the pond is lacking in calcite. The prerequisite of such a rain wash is a discontinuous vegetation
on the surrounding ground. A subarctic climate is also evidenced by the scattered stumps of the northern black spruce

Mastodons. M~mmoths. and Man in Americ~

1!1

(Picea mariana) near the margin of the initial pond. The
drowning of these trees was caused by melting of the
underlying dead ice block and the consequent subsidence
of the overburden. The clay C on the pond bottom graded
upward into peaty Clay B, and this layer into muck7 A, the
upper part of which has been disturbed by cultivation. The
boundary between layers C and B obviously indicates the
beginning of the post-glacial climatic amelioration, the
boundary between layers B and A the beginning of the postglacial warm period. Buried at depths ranging from one
foot to five feet (mostly at about two feet), the incomplete
mastodon remains lay disarticulated and scattered upon
the clay layer C. This clay precisely correlates with the upper
Dryas Clay of Europe, outwashed from decalcified soil of a
subarctic forest-tundra, as evidenced by stratigraphy. Layer
B, with preponderant organic material, indicates the beginning of the post-glacial or Recent. The upper Dryas Clay of
Europe was deposited during the final glaciation ("Schlussvereisung") dating (in Finoscandinavia) from about 8,800
to 8,100 B. C., according to geochronology. In North America this final glaciation was the Mankato substage of the
Wisconsin Glaciation, now ascertained by the radiocarbon
method to have reached its maximum about 11,000 years ago
(Arnold and Libby, 1951; Deevey, 1951) or about 9,000 B. C.
The scattered black spruces of the Richmond mastodon site
grew at the close of the Two Creeks Forest Bed interstadial
which is to be correlated with the Allerod interstadial of
Europe. The Richmond mastodon consequently died at the
close of the Wisconsin Glaciation around 8,000 B. C. or
somewhat earlier.
The position of the skull lying bottom side up, one tusk
standing vertically in the clay (here three feet f~hick) and
the tip broken off against the gravel below the clay, the
other tusk almost piercing the clay, certainly shows that
the skeletal remains had fallen off the pond ice-sheet when
it melted away in spring. The mastodon is likely to have
~/. The pol~ular term "muck" ought to be replaced in American scientific papers
by a more technical one ; at the above site it obviously means peaty mud (grovdetrltus~
g~ttja).

112

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

been coursed by a pack of carnivores, slid on the pond ice
and cracked one humerus (excavated in this condition),
and then been overcome and mangled by the beasts. Near
the mastodon bones were found fragments of charcoal and
a charred log; perhaps ancient hunters found the remains
of the carcass and tried to thaw it.
Two flint projectile points (Plate 18, Figs. I and J) were
found at a distance of about 15 and 20 feet, respectively,
from the skeleton. One was found in the same stratum with
the mastodon, the other in the basal part of the "muck." The
similarity of these points to some of those found by Koch
(Plate 18, Figs. A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H) will be immediately apparent and they would likewise seem to belong to the
Archaic culture, with dates of perhaps 5,000 years at the
most. If as evidenced by the different finding levels of the
spear points, they are not as old as the mastodon, they might
have reached their positions by being hurled at some game
in the pond long after the death of the mastodon.
H. F. Osborn’s map (1936, Fig. 123 b), reproduced here as
Figure 3 shows the distribution of mastodon remains in
North America and discloses that Mastodon amer~canus
still lived during the recession of the Wisconsin ice
sheet (as stated by Eiseley, 1945), and became extinct only
a short time after the Mankato maximum, probably by 7,500,
or at the latest by 7,000 B.C. Alberta, Saskatchewan, and
Quebec are devoid of mastodon sites, whereas if these
animals had still been living they could have followed the
retreating ice border far to the north. They had become
adapted to a subarctic environment for many millenia during the Wisconsin glaciation. This sudden extinction implies a climatic amelioration really catastrophic and comparable with the contemporaneous Finiglacial amelioration
in Europe. The mastodon in Alaska (one site) certainly
dates from an interglacial epoch, as do Panthera atrox and
MegaIonyx in Alaska (Flint, 1948, p: 524). When American pollen analysts apply hydrofluoric acid to the mineral
sediments of basal bog sections and compute the non-tree
pollen percentages and tree pollen frequency, they will often

Mastodons, Mammoths, and Man in America

113

WiTH ELEo
FIGURE 3
Distribution of the mastodon sites of the americanus in North America (according
to I-I. F. Osborn, 1936, fig. 123 b) ; and outermost expansion of the Wisconsin glaciation {accbrdlng to R. F. Flint, 1948).

be able to ascertain a late-glacial tundra or forest-tundra
phase in the periglacial area, as yet known only from Maine
(Deevey, 1949, pp. 1355, 1357; 1951). The forest sequences
suggested by Sears (1948, p. 331), based on pollen diagrams
from Ohio and Connecticutt during the 1Y~ankato substage,
certainly indicate forest-tundra.
Unfortunately the circumstances of occurrence in North
America are known for only very few mastodon sites. In

114

Texas A~chaeolog~cal a~i Paleontological Societ~

European areas freed from ice during the late-glacial period
there are a great many kettle-holes formed by melting of
underlying lumps of dead ice and filled with late glacial
sediments (clay, shell-marl, clayey or sandy mud, sometimes peaty mud and seldom peat) covered by a thin layer
of recent humus or clay which, therefore, yield remains of a
Pleistocene fauna at very shallow depths

(see Mitchell,

1951, as to the Irish Giant Deer); and the same is true of
some mastodon sites in which the embedding stratum was’
mostly clay or shell-marl (Koch, 1845, pp. 66, 68; Osborn,
1936, p. 788; Sanford, 1935).
Concerning Mastodon americanus Eise~ey (1945) held that
"we do know that his life span did not extend into the ti~e
of the archaeologically known horizons." Today this statement has just been refuted by radiocarbon datings of 10,000
years or slightly more published as yet for the most ancient
archaeological sites (Arnold and Libby, 1951; Roberts,
1951); this method recently indicated an age of 11,000 and
19,000 years, respectively, for the Folsom and Sandia layers
in Sandia Cave (Dr. Frank C. Itibben, oral communication),
and undoubtedly there are still older cultures which have
yet to be dated by a refined radiocarbon method. But the
fact remains that there have not been found any mastodon
mass kills comparable with the mammoth mass kills made
by late Aurignacian hunters in Czechoslovakia and southwestern Russia. However, from about 8,000 to 5,000 B. C.
(according to radiocarbon datings) several bison kills (comprising up to a hundred bison from a single site!) have
been unearthed in North America, associated with Folsom,
Plainview, and "Yuma" artifacts. Very few archaeological
s’.ites have yielded probably contemporary mastodon remains; and in many of these it is difficult to prove that
early hunters actually killed and butchered these animals.
Sometimes prehistoric hunters picked up fossil bones and
carried them to camp to use for making implements or for
use as fetiches, etc., and sometimes as the result of the same
collecting instinct that is found in people today (Roberts,
1940, p. 82, footnote). So far as I know, no archaeological

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

115

site has yielded mastodon bones split, charred, or burned by
contemporary man; the partly burned complete skeletons
may be explained in a different way, as I have shown above.
There are no authentic effigies of mastodons, either among
the mound builders of the Eastern United States from
3,000 ]3. C. onward

(Schellhas, 1908; Macgowan, 1950, p.

144), or in the Maya culture (Stromer, 1934), although both
regions abound in animal sculptures.

The real background

of Indian myths dealing with proboscideans lies in their
finding the fossil remains of these animals, in tales of negro
slaves, and in leading questions pumped into the Indians
by eighteenth century white men (Macgowan, 1950, p 143) o
Archaeological sites which yield mastodon remains associated with semi~ropicaI p~ants and animals require geological re-examination.

In 1840, Koch (1842, 1845, 1857)

excavated an almost complete mastodon skeleton (his Missourium theristocaulodon) associated with stone weapons
and buried apparently at the base of a bluff near the La
Pomme de Terre River, a tributary of the Osage River, in
Benton County, Missouri.

Here the river has cut a basin

some miles long and wide, filled with mineral sediments
somewhat beyond the Older Drift (unfortunately not yet
geologically surveyed).

Four layers of clay alternating

with three thin strata of limey gravel and sand as hard as
concrete, totaling twenty feet in thickness, covered a
stratum from four to six feet thick of "brown alluvial soil"
which contained the mastodon skeleton partly mingled with
the underlying quicksand. The brown alluvial soil "was
mixed with a great quantity of vegetal matter, and most of
this in a wonderful state of preservation; but what is still
more surprising, all of the vegetable remains are of tropical
or very low southern production. They consist of large
quantities of cypress burs, wood and bark; a great deal
of tropical swamp moss; several stumps of trees, if not logwood, yet bearing a close resemblance to it; even the greater

116

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

part of a flower of the StreIitzia class,s which, when destroyed, was not full blown; also several stems of palmetto
leaf,~ one possessing all the fibers in perfect condition or
nearly so ..... There was embedded immediately under the
femur .... an arrowhead of rose colored flint, resembling
those used by the American Indians but of larger size." In
the same stratum were found three more arrowheads of the
same form and one more "of very crude workmanship." At
least one of these five points is said to have been ~luted
(Ashley-Montagu and Peterson, 1944, p. 419) but unfortunately it could not be traced for verification. The semitropical plant remains argue in favor of Sangamon .age
rather than the post-glacial warm optimum; but we do not
know whether or not the brown alluvium overlies unconformably a much older stratum. The primary association of artifacts and mastodon remains, however, is unquestionable.
On the eastern coast of Florida, at Melbourne and Vero,
human bones and artifacts were excavated in the upper part
of layer No. 2, associated with remains of mastodon, two
elephant species, a tapir jaw (at Melbourne), and plant remains of living semitropical species. Layer 2 (Melbourne
bone bed which yielded at one locality 49 vertebrate species,
28 of which are extinct) has just b~en dated by Rouse (1951
pp. 31, 33) as "Early Postglacial up to about 1800 B. C." according to the changes in sea level, but these changes (and
more than these: the fossils) argue rather in favor of a
temperate Wisconsin interstadial as supposed by other
scientists (most probably Peorian) ; the human remains are
intrusive according to Rouse.
The Bee County sites in the Coastal Plain region of Texas
were buried in the basal part of a river terrace (compare
Melbourne and Vero layer 2), and yielded bones of mastodon, mammoth, horse, camel, bison, sloth, and artifacts
8. One of the 50 or 60 svecles of Heltconia (the only genus of Strelitzioideae in
Amerlc~) now growing in Central America, Colombia, Guiana, Peru, and the West
’:Indies. but absent from the Gulf Coast region of the Unitedl States (~L Winkler in
Engler-Prantl’s "Die ]’$atuerliahen Pflanzenfam~iien," Band 15a, 1930).
9. Sabal adansoniana, characteristic of the Cypress Swamp. which sl~reads northward to northern Louisana (Harshberger’s "’Vegetation der Erde." Band 13, 1911).

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

~ 17

which include an odd combination of projectile points:
fluted-lanceolate, unfluted-lanceolate, stemmed with large
corner notches, and a "Yuma" fragment which would now
be called a Scottsbluff point (Sellards, 1940). The vertebrate fauna is similar to the bone-bearing layer No. 2 at the
Vero and Melbourne sites in Florida and has been tentatively correlated with it (Sellards, 1940; Bryan, 1941 b). According to Sellards (1940, p. 1659) the geologic age of this
formation is definitely Pleistocene, and "one is inclined to
think of an interval of possibly two or three times 25,000
years."
Thus there are very few sites so far which have yielded
true or probably true primary association of mastodon and
man. It appears that the first immigrants did not contribute
anything to its extinction.
These inferences apply to the mammoth also. As is well
known, this name does not apply to the mammoth in the
European sense only (i. e., to Elephas primigenius) but to
all of several American species. Moreover, mammoth and
mastodon are sometimes confounded (compare Dunbar and
Schuchert, 1941, pp. 45 and 233), and American authors,
especially archaeologists, usually call the mammoth
"Elephas sp." even though molars are present. According
to Flint (1948, p. 360), "mammoths clearly did persist into
post-ice-sheet-time in North America," and Roberts (1951)
states that they were being hunted by early man.
During the Wisconsin Glaciation, Elephas (Mammonteus)
primigenius, the woolly mammoth, ranged southward only
to about 40° N. Lat. (Osborn, 1930, map on p. 230; 1942,
pp. 914, 1135, 1164, and Figs. 795, 1005, 1028). This is curious
because the arctic musk ox ranged southward to Texas and
southern New Mexico. This discrepancy may be due to
Osborn (1922) having assigned the woolly mammoth remains from about the 40th parallel southward into Mexico
to another species, EIephas (Parelephas) jeffersonii.~o
10.
In a communication by letter, Dr. K. D. Adam, Curator of paleontology
at the Staatlichen Museum fuer Naturkunde, Stuttgart, and expert in Elephas
taxonomy, considers the specific identification of Elephas (Parelephas) Jeffersonii
progressus (Osborn, 1924, from Ohio), floridanus (Osborn, 1929, from Florida), and
E. ~Mammonteus) primigenius, based on the molars.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

In the United States, remains of the woolly mammoth
have not been found in bogs, as have those of the mastodon (Flint, 1948, p. 523), even though E. primigenius, characteristic of Pleistocene tundra and steppe, might have been
able to live in a discontinuous forest-tundra (compare Field,
1948, p. 57). In Europe, too, remains of this mammoth have
not been found in late-glacial bogs. In western Europe, E.
pr~migenius became rare in early Magdalenian time and extinct in western and central Europe around middle Magdalenian time. He has not been found in the peat of the
middle Magdalenian site near Schussenquelle in southern
Germany, nor in the oldest bog sites of Holstein in northern
Germany, dating around 14,000 B. C. (earliest Gothiglacial
time). In Russia and Siberia he became extinct perhaps
somewhat later, but long before the close of the late-glacial
period; the paleolithic sites of eastern Siberia lack remains
of the woolly mammoth (Field, 1948, pp. 63, 64). Therefore
the absence of such remains in bogs of the United States
argues that this elephant died out before the formation of
bogs and swamps in the northeastern section, i. e., prior to
the Two Creeks Forest Bed interstadial, for which radiocarbon datings of about 9,000 to 10,500 B. C. have been
obtained (Arnold and Libby, 1951). The first bogs of the
Wisconsin periglacial and the late-glacial recession area are
not older than the bogs of northern Germany and Scandinavia, although the Wisconsin (Laurentide) ice sheet extended twelve degrees of latitude farther south than did
the Scandinavian ice-cap; but today the southern boundary
of the tundra zone in North America (in the Hudson Bay
region) also reaches twelve degrees farther south than
it does in northeastern Russia.
In Alaska alone, remains of the woolly mammoth have
been found with artifacts in frozen muck, e. g., near Fairbanks, Circle, and Chinitna Bay. According to Rainey
(1939, pp. 390-401) frozen muck from one to forty meters
thick covers many of the richest gold-bearing gravels on
the floors of stream valleys tributary to the main rivers.
It is thawed and sluiced off by hydraulic methods applied in
the modern large-scale placer operations which are strip-

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

119

ping wide cuts, often miles in length, along numerous
streams.
"The overburden of frozen muck which is made up largely of
fine mica silt from eroded schist bedrock also contains lenses of
gravel, sand, peat, volcanic ash, large quantities of vegetable matter, and often clear ice deposits. In addition to trees, stumps,
brush, moss, and other vegetable remains there are fresh water
mollusks as well as large numbers of mammal bones ..... No
regular stratification exists in the muck, but .... there were, apparently, separate flows of muck from higher slopes in the valley.
The flow of soil from upper slopes down into broad glacial stream
valleys, brought about by alternate freezing and thawing (a condition which can be observed at the present time in central Alaska),
may prove to be the explanation; if so, it is probable that some
vegetable as well as faunal remains in the muck have been redeposited, or moved down from the slopes during different advances." (Rainey, 1939, pp. 390-391).

This solifluction hypothesis apparently explains the
origin of these muck deposits far better than the suggestion
by Hibben (1943) that they are wind blown materials
from outwash plains of local glaciations, although this (and
downwashed material) probably were accessory.
Near Fairbanks there have been collected the frozen but
unfossilized bones of such living species as moose and caribou, and of such extinct mammals as woolly mammoth and
Pleistocene bison (both common), horse, mastodon, musk
ox (two species), sabre-toothed tiger, lion (Pan, hera atrox),
camel, gazelle, antelope, sloth (Megalonyx), an extinct bear,
rodents, and sheep. Part of this fauna (e. g., Panthera atrox,
Megalonyx, sabre-toothed tiger, mastodon) certainly should
date from an interglacial period, probably late Sangamon.
The radiocarbon method has given an age of more than
20,000 years for wood found under 80 to 100 feet of frozen
muck in the gold diggings at Eva Creek near Fairbanks
(Arnold and Libby, 1951, p. 118). Considering the mixture
of faunal remains from different periods, as unearthed by
the hydraulic giants, it will rarely be possible to prove their
primary association with artifacts.
A small stemmed projectile point decidedly younger than
the fluted points is reported to have been piped out of
"virgin gravel" at least 24 meters below the muck surface
(Rainey, 1939, p. 397). A few implements were found at

120

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

the base of the muck in frozen hummocks which often remain after the bulk of muck has been thawed and removed.
At some 20 meters below the surface a projectile point
allegedly lay in a depression of half the maxillary bone of
a young mastodon, but the latter shows no trace of injury
inflicted by the point (Rainey, 1939, pp. 397-398), so that a
primary association seems questionable.
The best evidence of woolly mammoth having been hunted
bY man in central Alaska seems to be "a deposit containing
over one hundred young mammoth teeth scattered over an
area a few meters in diameter," together with several burned
bone fragments (Rainey, 1939, p. 399). This is reminiscent
of the Predmost findings in Europe and was at the base of
muck some 20 meters thick on Ester Creek. Unfortunately,
no datable artifacts were found.
Macgowar~ (1950, pp. 119, 151) has described the frozen
muck at the foot of the volcano Iliamna near Chinitna Bay,
Alaska, as
".... an extraordinary formation four to one hundred feet deep.
Packed into it are masses of dismembered skeletons of the mammoth, a jaguar, and other extinct animals, acc.ompanied here and
there by ligaments of flesh and hair .... Their numbers are appalling. They lie frozen in ~angled masses interspersed with uprooted trees. They seem to have been torn apart and dismembered and then consolidated under catastrophic conditions. Yuma
and Plainview spear points and perhaps one Generalized Folsom
have been found in these chill beds. Skin, ligament, hair, flesh
can still be seen."

Here again the occurrence of interglacial fauna such as
Panthera atrox, and of artifacts probably no older than the
Mankato maximum, gives evidence of the mixing of materials of different ages.
So far as I can find out, there is no evidence in America
of mass kills of woolly mammoth comparable to those of
Czechoslovakia and southern Russia, except probably the
undated occurrence at Ester Creek mentioned above. There
is not a single incontestable case of man having hunted the
woolly mammoth in North America outside of Alaska, the
mammoths of the United States being of other species.

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

121

An astonishingly large number of sites in the United
States (a score or more) have, since 1931, yielded mammoth
remains with artifacts and/or human bones (Roberts, 1940;
Wormington, 1949; Macgowan, 1950). The species has in
most cases not been determined, however, except for E.
columbi at the Cowan Ranch in the Texas Panhandle (Sellards, 1938) and the skeletons from the Clovis site in eastern
New Mexico, which have been listed as E. columbi (Cotter,
1937 a) and as "Parelephas ? columbi Falconer" (Cotter,
1937 b) for the same remains. At both sites virtually complete skeletons were found and in direct association were
large fluted projectile points originally reported as "Folsomlike." These points should now be considered good examples of the Clovis Fluted type, rather than Folsom, and
there is evidence that they may be considerably older than
Folsom artifacts (A. D. Krieger, communication). Sellards
(1938, p. 1008) states that "Among the many sinks of the
High Plains, the one on the Cowan ranch, which contained
the artifacts in association with the fossil elephants, is
relatively old. It would not be surprising if it should prove
to be pre-Wisconsin in age. However, an exact determination of the age of these fossils must await correlation data
not now available."
E. columbi was reported some decades ago in ~wam~s of
Whitman County, Washington, outside the formerly glaciated area." This find ought to be dated by a competent
geologist.
Besides E. columbi, remains of E. (Archidiskodon) imperator and E. (Parelephas) jeffersonii have been reported from
archaeological sites in the western half of the United States
south of the 40th parallel and in Mexico. Unfortunately,
we don’t know reliably as yet the life span of these American elephants; the dates given by Osborn (1936, 1942) are
often contradictory and sometimes not reliable for other
reasons. Flint (1948, p. 523 footnote 1) holds that not only
the woolly mammoth, but also E. imperator andE. coIumbi,
11.

In Science, n. s., Vol. XVII, No. 430, D~. 511-512, 1903 (not available to me).

122

Texas Archaeological and Pa~eon$ological Society

"likewise persisted until very late in the Wisconsin age."
More precise dating of their extinction is needed.
Near Dent, Colorado, excavations uncovered a large number of "mammoth" skeletons (Archidiskodon, according to
Bryan and McCann, 1943, p. 289), mostly those of young
females. Large fluted spear points (type Clovis Fluted, according to Wormington, 1949, p. 39) were reported in association and this find possibly suggests a mass kill.

Bryan

and Ray (1940, pp. 48-49) correlate this site either with the
maximum advance of the Corral Creek glaciation or with
the beginning of its retreat; they also correlate Corral
Creek of the Rocky Mountains with the Mankato advance
of the Great Lakes region.and suggest a date of about 25,000
years ago, "subject to an unknown error which may reach
30 per cent." The current radiocarbon datings for the Mankato stage, about 11,000 years ago, would seem to give too
late a date for these elephants, and it is not certain that the
Corral Creek advance can be dated through the Mankato.
Most of the sites which yielded Elephas remains and artifacts can be interpreted in different ways. Erosion by wind
or water has perhaps exposed skeletons millenia after they
were deposited in ponds, and sometimes brought them together with younger artifacts; or ancient floods may have
washed them together. Sediments obviously rede~)osited
and therefore misleading were found in the bank of Whitewater Draw northwest of Douglas, Arizona. Here the remains of a Cochise complex with one radiocarbon dating
of about 8,000 years includes hearth stones, hammerstones,
manos, flat milling stones, and charcoal of poplar and hickory, found buried 13.5 feet below the present surface in a
sand stratum described as a floodplain deposit from a permanent river in a wet era. The cultural remains were associated with bones of sloth, dire wolf, extinct bison and
horse, and a mammoth identified as Archidiskodon (Sayles
and Antevs, 1941, p. 64). The skull of a mammoth was removed several years before from laminated marl said to
overlie the sand stratum. A direct association of Archidis-

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

123

~mdon with such an artifact assemblage seems strange indeed; and it may be pointed out that if elephants had
roamed North America as recently as 6,000 B. C. there
should be instances of their more or less complete skeletons
in bogs of the northeastern United States or in stratified
lake deposits of this period in the Western states, together
with Folsom points or younger artifacts.
The mammoth of Angus, Nebraska, is E. meridionalis
brascensis, according to Osborn, and consequently suspect
of lower to middle Pleistocene age if the identification is
correct (which seems to me very questionable). Allegedly
below a shoulder blade of this mammoth there was discovered a large fluted point, but this is open to suspicion
with the species determination mentioned above, and the
fossiliferous stratum has not been geologically dated. Moreover, the skeleton being complete and the bones intact, this
mammoth, while possibly hunted, apparently was not dismembered or roasted by man.
The evidence for man having hunted elephants and mastodons will be of two kinds: an unquestionable, primary
association of artifacts with the remains; or the dismembering, splitting, and burning ofthe remains. The finding
of only a bone or a tooth in an archaeological site need not
mean that the animal was killed by man. Hunters must occasionally have picked up the bones or teeth of animals and
carried them to camp merely as curios, and this seems to me
probable in the case of the mammoth teeth in the Folsom
stratum of Sandia Cave, New Mexico, deposited at the most
about 11,000 years ago. In some cases, isolated bones or teeth
may have reached the upper strata of archaeological sites,
as in the digging of pits by the Indians.
Thus, the problem of mastodon and elephant hunting ascribed to early man in America requires critical examination
both of primary association of artifacts and geological dat.ing of the deposits. Some sites that have yielded mammoth
game remains (such as Dent, Ester Creek, Cowan rancl~,
Clovis, and possibly Angus) might possibly date from the
Peorian interstadial. Moreover the problem of Sangamon

124

Texas Archaeological and PaleontoZogical Society

interglacial immigration of the earliest hunters ought to
be approached by further investigations. Especially since
Penck (1930, pp. 24-25) has wholeheartedly advocated sucl~
a dating for the first immigration, and Canals Frau i1950,
p. 548) and Macgowan (I950, p. 222) have at least shown
no inclination to reject it.~2
During the last 25 years American archaeologists and
geologists have achieved admirable researches and illuminated the earliest pre-history of their country by a really imposing standard. The magnificent American radiocarbon
method is an invaluable improvement of dating. Paleobotanical (especially pollen-analytical) researches ought to be
undertaken systematically in order to explore the environmental conditions experienced by the £irst human inhabitants of America, and to date archaeological and paleontological finds discovered in lake sediments and bogs.
Summary. Eight of the flint projectile points and knives
or axes [Plate 18] found by Albert C. Koch in 1838 with the
half-burned skeleton Of Mastodon americanus, in Gasconade
County, Missouri, have recently been located in Berlin.
They can be ascribed to the Archaic culture pattern of the
Eastern United States and are thought to date no earlier than
the latter part of the post-glacial warm period or optimum,
probably some thousands of years later than the extinction
of mastodons. It is suggested that later Indians found a
practically complete skeleton near their camp, perhaps exposed by a spring freshet, and for superstitious reasons tried
to destroy it by burning and then hurling rocks at it. The
same reasoning may account for the famous purported association of a partly burned mastodon skeleton and numerous potsherds at Alangasi, Ecuador: Two projectile points
[Plate 18, Figs. I and J] found near the Richmond mastodon
in Indiana are very similar to those found by Koch and may
’12~
E. B. Howard (Bulletin, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol 4, pp. 17-18, 1932) has described finding a "Generalized Fo]som" point in Burner
Cave, southeastern ]New Mexico, in levels which also contained bones of an extinc~
musk-ox or animal of the musk-ox group.
If such a musk-ox, an arctic animal of
~he open tundra, were actually killed by man here, it must have been at a time
much more ancient than Folsom man.
This spear point would now be clas~ifled
with the Clovis Fluted type (A. D. Krieger, communication).

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

125

also have become accidentally associated with a mastodon
killed much earlier by carnivores; this skeleton can be
geologically dated toward the close of the Mankato substage
of the Wisconsin Glaciation. The alternative interpretation,
that tl~e artifacts shown in Plate 18 are to be considered as
old as the mastodons and the Mankato substage, does not
agree with. present estimates of American archaeologists
on the age of these "Archaic" artifacts. Furthermore, in the
three cases cited, the skeletons had not been dismembered
nor the bones split open, as one would expect if they had
been killed by man. Osborn’s map of mastodon localities
in North America (Fi.gure 3) shows a close agreement between their northward distribution and the southern boundary of Wisconsin glaciation; from which it is inferred that
the mastodon: had disappeared completely very soon after
the Mankato substage or by 8,000 to 7,000 B. C.
The woolly .mammoth so far as is known is never found
in (lacustrine) bogs like Mastodon americanus; that this may
be due to its being a tundra dweller, while mastodon was
primarily a forest browser, is certainly a wrong argumentation, because the late-glacial tundra, too, was rich in
swamps and lakes (compare the case of the fossil Irish
Giant Deer). The woolly mammoth was probably hunted
in Alaska (as at Ester Creek) but it can not as yet be
accurately dated there. Other fauna in the same "muck"
deposits suggest a much warmer climate than the present,
possibly the Sangamon interglacial. In Europe the woolly
mammoth became extinct prior to 15,000 B. C.
Other ~species of mammoth have been reported from numerous archaeological sites in the United States and as far
south as Central America, but it is difficult to distinguish
in the literature between isolated bones and teeth which
may hav.e been carried into camp sites as curios, or by
stream or wind erosion, or other causes, and those which
prove that these animals were killed and butchered by man.
The discoveries at Dent, Colorado; the Cowan ranch in
Texas;Clovis, .New Mexicb; and perhaps others, prove that
man killed Elephas (PareIepha~)columbi, but the geological

126

Te~a~

dating of these sites has not yet attained precision. It is
possible that American geologists and archaeologists have
been somewhat too conservative in their estimates of 10,000
years or so for the extinction of elephants; such remains
could date from interstadials of the Wisconsin glaciation, or
even from the Sangamon interglacial. Man probably did
not contribute greatly to the extinction of either the mastodon or the various species of mammoth in North America.
Bamberg, Bavaria, Germany
August 8, 1951
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allison, Vernon C.
(1926) "The Antiquity of the Deposits in Jacob’s
Cavern." Anthropological Papers o5 the American Museum o5 Natural History, Vol. XIX, part VI, pp. 297-335.
Arnold, J. R., and Libby, W. F.
(1951) "Radiocarbon Dates."
2927, pp. 111-120.

Science, Vol. 113, No.

Ashley-Montagu, M. F., and Peterson, C. Bernard
(1944) "The earliest account of the association of human
artifacts with fossil mammals in North America."
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol.
87, No. 5, pp. 407-419.
Bryan, Kirk
(1941 a) "Correlation of the deposits of Sandia Cave,
New Mexico, with the glacial chronology." In: Frank
C. Hibben, 1941.
Bryan, Kirk
(1941 b)
"Geologic antiquity of man in America."
Science, Vo!. 93, No. 2422, pp. 505-514.
Bryan, Kirk and McCann, F. F.
(1943) "Sand Dunes and Alluvium near Grants, New
Mexico," American Antiquity, Vol. 8, pp. 281-295.

Bryan, Kirk, and Ray, Louis L.
(1940)

"Geologic antiquity of the Lindenmeier Site

in Colorado," Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,
Vol. 99, No. 2, pp. 1-76.
Canals Frau, S.
(1950)

Prehis~oria de America.

Cotter, J. L.
(1937 a)

Buenos Aires, 588pp.

"The Significance of Folsom and Yuma

Artifact Occurrences in the Light of Typology and Distribution," Philadelphia Anthropological Society, 25th
Anniversary Studies, Vol. 1, pp. 27-35.
Cotter, ,/. L.
(1937 a)

"The Significance of Folsom and Yuma

in Pluvial Deposits near Clovis, New Mexico: Part IV,
Report on Excavation at the Gravel Pit, 1936." Proceedings, Academy o] Natural Sciences o] Philadelphia, Vol.
LXXXIX, pp. 1-16.
Deevey, Edward S. Jr.
(1949) "Biography of the Pleistocene.

Part I. Europe

and North America." Bulletin of the Geological Society
o] America.

Vol. 60, pp. 1315-1416.

Deevey, Edward S., Jr.
(1951)

"Late-glacial and postglacial pollen diagrams

from Maine."
pp. 177-207.

American Journal oS Science.

Vol. 249,

Eiseley, Loren C.
(1945) "The Mastodon and Early Man in America."
Science, Vol. 102, No. 2640, pp. 108-110.
Eiseley, Loren C.
(1946) "Men, Mastodons, and Myths."
Monthly, Vol. LXII, pp. 517-524.

The Scienti]ic

128

Texa~ Archaeologicgl and Paleontological Societ~

Field, H.
(1948) "Contributions to the Anthropology of the Soviet
Union."

Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections.

Vol.

110, No. 13, pp. 1-244.
Flint, R. F.
(1948) Glacial Geology and the Pleistocene Epoch. New
York and London, 589pp.
Flint, R. F., and Deevey, E. S., Jr.
¯ (1951) "Radiocarbon dating of late-Pleistocene events."
American Journal of Science. Vol. 249, pp. 257-300.
Hibben, Frank C.
(1941) "Evidences of early occupation in Sandia Cave,
New Mexico, and other sites in the Sandia-Manzano region," Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 99,
No. 23, pp. 1-64.
Hibben, Frank C.
(1943) "Evidence of Early Man in Alaska."
Antiquity, Vol. 8, pp. 255-257.

American

Koch, Albert C.
(1842) Description of the Missourium Theristocaulodon
or Missouri Leviathan (Leviathan M~ssour~ensis) together with its supposed habits, and Indian ~raditions
concerning the location from whence it was exhumed;
also, comparisons on the whale, crocodile, and Missourium, with.the Leviathan, as described in the 41st chapter of the book of Job. Fourth edition, London, E.
Fisher, 33 Cannon Street. City, 23pp. (pp. 20-23 Evidence of human existence contemporary with fossil
animals).
Koch, Albert C.
(1845) Die Riesenthiere :der Urwelt oder das neuentdeckte Missourium Theristocaulodon (Sichelzahn au~
Missou~) und die Mastodontoiden im AII~emeinen und
Besonderen, nebs~ Beweise~, dass vieIe, uns dutch ihre
Ueberreste bekannt gewordene Thiere nicht praeada-

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

129

misisch, sondern Zeitgenossen des MenschengeschIects
waren. Berlin, Verlag von Alexander Duncker, 99 pp.
Koch, Albert C.
(1857) "Mastodon Remains, in the State of Missouri, together with evidences of the existence of Man contemporaneously with the Mastodon." Transactions of the
Academy of Science, St. Louis, Vol. I, pp. 61-64.
Koch, Albert C.
(1860) "On the bones of mastodon." Transactions o] the
Academy of Science, St. Louis, Vol. I, pp. 116-118.
(Journal of Proceedings for meeting 5 April 1858)..
Macgowap., Kenneth
(1950) Early man in the New World.
Company, New York, 260 pp.

The Macmillan

Mitchell, G. F.
(195I) "Studies in Irish Quaternary Deposits No. 7".
Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, Vol. LIII, B,
No. 11, pp. 113-206.
Osborn, Henry Fairfield
(1930) "The romance of the woolly mammoth.,’ Natural
History, Vol. XXX, No. 3, pp. 227-241.
Osborn, Henry Fairfield
(1936-1942) Proboscidea, Vol. I and II, New York.
Penck, A.
(1930) "Warm kamen die Indianer nach Nordamerika?"
Proceedings of the 23rd International Congres~ of
Americanists, (held at New York, September 17-22,
1928), New York, pp. 23-30.
Rainey, FroeHch G.
(1939) "Archaeology in Central Alaska." Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History. Vol. XXXVI, part IV, pp. 355-405..
Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr.
(1936) "Additional information on the Folsom complex.
Report on the second season’s investigations at the Lin-

130

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

denmeier site in northern Colorado." Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 95, No. 10, pp. 1-38.
Roberts, Frank H. H. Jr.
(1940) "Developments in the problem of the North
American Paleo-Indian." Smithsonian Miscellaneous
Collections, Vol. 100, pp. 51-116.
Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr.
(1951) "The early Americans."

The ScientiSic Monthly,

Vol. 184, No. 2, pp. 15-79.
Rouse, Irving
(1951) "A Survey of Indian River Archeology, Florida."
Yale University Publications in Anthropology, No. 44,
296 pp., New Haven.
Sanford, John T.
(1935) "The Richmond Mastodon." Proceedings o] the
Rochester Academy o] Science. Vol. 7, No. 5, pp. 137-156.
Sayles, E, B. and Antevs, Ernst
(1941) "The Cochise Culture." Gila Pueblo, Medallion
Paper, No. XXIX, Globe, Arizona.
Schellhas, Paul
(1908) "An den Grenzen unseres Wissens. Dunkle Gebierte der Menschheitsgeschichte." Wien und Leipzig,
pp. 56-62. (Elephanten in Amerika.)
Sehuchert, Charles and Dunbar, Carl O.
(194I) "Outlines of historical geology." War Departmerit Education Manual E. M. 463, 291 pp.
Sears, Paul B.
(1948) "Forest sequence and climatic change in northeastern North America since early Wisconsin Time."
Ecology, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 326-333.
Sellards, E. H.
(1938) "Artifacts Associated with Fossil Elephant."
Bulletin, Geological Society o] America, Vol. 49, pp. 999-

I010.

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

Sellards, E. H.
(1940) "Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils
from Bee County, Texas." Bulletin, Geological Society
o5 America, Vol. 51, pp. 1627-1658.
Spillman, Fr.
(1929 a) "Das letzte Mastodon yon Suedamerika," Natur
und Museum, Bd. 59, Heft 2, pp. 119-123.
Spillman,
(1929 b) "Das suedarnerikanische Mastodon als Zeitgenosse des Menschen majoiden Kulturkreises." Paleonto~og. Zeitschr. Bd. XI, No. 2, pp. 170-177.
Stock, Chester
(1917) "Structure of the pes in My~odon harlani." University of California Publications, Bulletin o5 the Department o5 Geology, Vol. 10, No. 16, pp. 267-286.
Stromer, E.
(1934) "Gibt es zeitgenoessische Abbildungen von Mastodonten?" Palaeontolog. Zeitschr. Bd. XVI, pp. 85-90.
~Jhle, Max

(1930) "Spaete Mastodonten in Ecuador," Proceedings
of the 23rd International Congress o5 Amer~canists,
(1928), New York, pp. 247-258.
Wormington, H. M.
(1949) Ancient Man in North America. The Denver Museum of Natural History Popular Series No. 4, third
edition, 198 pp.

A SERIES OF EIGHTEEN INDIAN SKELETONS
EXCAVATED IN SHACKELFORD
COUNTY, TEXAS
ROBERT E. FOP,RESTER,

Je.

Located ten miles southwest of Albany, Shackelford
County, Texas, is an extensive surface site in which eighteen
skeletons were found. The area consists of rolling plains
dotted with small hills and mesas. It is situated just east
of the Albany Scarp which bounds the higher western plains.
Elevation is approximately 1500 feet above sea-level. A
prehistoric site, over one mile long and about three hundred
yards wide, is located on the north and west side of a small
stream known locally as the Salt Prong of Hubbard Creek,
(Figure 4, B). Normally, the locale is covered by mesquite
trees, prickly-pear cacti, pencil cacti, cat-claw brush, and
scrub grasses; however, this area was cleared in 1944. At
present, there are no natural springs or permanent waterholes within five miles.
The locale is well suited for fall and winter camps. It
is just off the high plains where there are bitter winter
winds; and the site probably afforded a constant water
supply. The presence of permanent water may be deduced
from two facts; first, that a large camp would probably be
situated close to an ample water supply~ and secondly, a
great number of fresh-water mussel-shells are present in
the ref~use, in too large a number to have been carried any
distance.
The soil, at least to a depth of five feet, is an unstratified
red-colored loess. The rocks on the near-by hills are all of a
compact lime type. About three to five inches of water
and wind deposited earth covered the site. This soil is now
eroding in many places. Burned limestone hearths abound
in the eroded areas, which also reveal fragmentary bones
and mussel shells, in addition to the common flint flakes.
Artifacts are rare in the site, but this is possibly due to extensive "pot-hunting." The few projectile points found are
of a great diversity of types, which could indicate oeeupa-

A Series o~ Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated

tion by successive waves of Indians.

133

Fauna of the area in-

cludes bison, two varieties of deer, bear, rabbit, skunk,
opossum, raccoon, prairie-dog, squirrel, badger, and a diversity of water fowl.
Of interest in this non-pottery area is a small sherd of
plain red ware. This sherd has not been identified, but
appears to be of a fairly late horizon.
At this site on the Salt ’Prong, four burial plots have
been excavated. These plots contain from one to nine
skeletons. Each skeleton is numbered with reference to the
order of excavation. Excavation was begun in July, 1938.
Burial Plot I, (Figure 4, C), was first detected by the presence of fiat rocks that had been raised from their normal
position by the blade, of a "bull-dozer." This .burial contained one adult male about thirty-five years old. The
individual was lying on the right side with the head in a
westerly direction. The burial was at a depth of approximately forty-five centimeters. The "bull-dozer" had so
shifted the rocks that the bones were disarranged from the
original burial position. One flat rock,. ~’ou~hly two feet
square, had been placed over the ches~’~region. L~rge and
small flat rocks were then thrown onto the flat ’slab of
rock until the ground level was reached.
:
Burial Plot II was located one hundred and forty-seven
fee.t west southwest of Burial Plot I, (Figure 4, C). It was
placed on to~p of a small elevation, onehundred yard.s w.est
of the Salt PrOng Branch. Several rocks on the surface
formed an oval five feet long and four feet wide, with the
long axis of the oval running east and west. Thirty-five
rocks were placed on the grave, each small enough to have
been carried from the stream-bed by one man without aid.°
Two large rocks were laid flat over the head and chest
region. The bones lay fifty cm. below the present surface.
The grave floor was flat, and was without a rock lining.
No ash or charcoal levels were found, although bits of charcoal were mixed throughout the grave fill. Fire traces were
noted on certain bones, notably the charred lower mandible

134

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

FIGURE 4

A Ser~es of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated

of a child.

135

This charred mandible lay in the chest region of

Skeleton One, and was the only bone in the grave which was
badly charred; it was also the only bone of a child.

Two individuals were interred in this grave. Skeleton
One is a twenty year old male who was well articulated.
Position of the body was semi flexed on the right side, with
the head to the south. The fore-arms were crossed; the left
hand lay against the right cheek, and the right hand was
to the chin. A projectile point, three inches long (Figure
5, A. a) was found in situ directly above the proximal end
of the right femur, on a plane with the head and neck of the
greater trochanter. It was directly under the left ilium and
under the left femur. This position precludes the possibility of the point being a burial offering. Evidently this individual was shot in the right coccygeal region from the
rear.
Skeleton Two is an eighteen year old male. It was buried
at the same time as Skeleton One. The bones were completely disarticulated and scattered at random from the skull
to the pelvis of Skeleton One, mainly in the open space
between the flexed knees and the shoulders.
All of the long bones of Skeleton Two were present, but
many of the vertebrae, smaller ribs, and hand and foot bones
were missing. Found embedded in the coronoid fossa of the
right humerus was a second point, Figure 5, A, b). The tang
and one barb was broken, but both this and the point from
the groin of Skeleton One (Figure 5, A, a) appear to be
specimens of Ray’s Sand Dune culture.~
When the point was removed from the humerus, it was
1.
Ray, C. N.,
Section," BuLletin
1. ~V.. 12-15.

°’A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene
of t~e Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.

FIGURE 4
A. Map of ShackeIford County, Texas.

B. Map of area surrounding site on Salt Prong of Hubbard Creek.
C. MaI~ giving distribution of carn~ and Burial Plot~.
D. Diagram of Burial Plot IIL

136

Tezas Archaeoh~.a~ a~d Paleonto~o~ca[ Society

found that a diagonal chip from the tip of the point was
missing and the chip was not in the bone. The absence of
the chip may be explained in two ways. First, that the point
was broken before use; or secondly, the point first struck
another object and was deflected, thus losing a chip.
The distal end of the right ulna was broken and had marks
on the outer side of the bone such as would be caused
by cutting with a stone implement. There were no corresponding marks on the interior of the ulna or on the
radius; thus eliminating the possibility of animal teeth
marks. This presents the possibility of taking a hand as
a war trophy.
Burial Plot III was found undisturbed approximately
one hundred and fifty yards north-east of Burial Plot I,
(Figure 4, A). This burial plot contained skeletons, buried
at different times (Figure 4, D). The area is roughly oval
in outline, being slightly wider at the east end. Dimensions
of the burial plot are fifty-four inches from north to south
and. seventy-five inches from east to west.
Skeleton One is an aged female. The body was placed
in a flexed position on the right side with the head orientt~l
to the west. The grave is~ sixty cm. below the present
surface.
Skeletons Two and Three are decomposed infants. Both
Were buried with Skeleton Four. Depth of this grave was
seventy-five cm.
Skeleton Four is an adult male. He was located directly
under Skeleton One; the head has an eastward orientation.
This individual had an exceptionally thick cranium. Under
the occipital bone of the skull of this skeleton was a burial
FIGURE 5

A. a. Projectile point similar to Sand Dune Culture.
b, Projectile point embedded in human humerus.
e. Projectile point.
B. ~n~rraved bone tube~ ~soeiated with Skeleton 1, Burial Plot IV.
C~ Shell pendan.t~ a. is c~nvex side of pendant, b. iv rever~e side of the ~ame
pendant.
D. Diagram of Burial Plot IV.
E. Bone implement a~ociatod with Skeleton 4, Burial Plot

A Series o] E~ghteen Indian, Skeletons Excavated

A

~

FIGURE

137

138

Texas Archaeological a~d Paleontological Societ~

offering of bone tools consisting of one deer antler tip
(Figure 5, E, g), three deer split radii (Figure 5, E, a, b,
and c), one unfinished awl (Figure 5, E, e), one polished deer
radius awl eight inches long (Figure 5, E, e), and one flaking tool from a deer ulna (Figure 5, E, f). These seven
items were bundled into a compact mass and were in a good
state of preservation. A broken projectile point was found
(Figure 5, A, c), which appears to fit into the Sand Dune
Culture also.
Skeleton Five appeared to be a slightly later burial. It
was marked off from the remainder of the grave by a vertical wall of two flat rocks (Plate 19, E). This is an adult
male, lying on the left side with the head to the south
in a tightly flexed position. Eight inches behind the skull
was a burial offering of five items. The offering consists
of two fresh water mussel shells, one laid inside the other,
two deer ulna tools, and one snake skeleton without a skull.
The snake skeleton had one hundred and seventy-four vertebrae, some giving the appearance of having been roasted.
Skeletons Six and Seven were infants who were buried at
the same level, four inches apart. Skeleton Six was in a
flexed position with the head to the northwest. The graves
were one-hundred and thirty-five cm. below the present
surface.
Skeleton Eight is a young female. The body position was
on the back with the head to the north-east The right hand
was across the flexed knees; the left arm was bent across
the chest, and the left hand was cupped about the right
elbow.
Burial Plot 1V is located about seventy-five yards northeast of Burial Plot III (Figure 4, C), and appeared from
PLATE 19
A.
B.
C.
tary.
D.

Occipital view of the skull of Skeleton 3. Burial Plot IV, showing the Inca bone.
Side view of the skull of Skeleton 3, Burial Plot IV.
Burial Plot IL Two adult male skeletons, one articulated and the other fragmenGrave orientation is to the south.
Burial Plot II showing the rocks covering the grave.

E. Burial plot III showing rocks covering graves.
F. Burial Plot III, Skelton :No. 6. An infant.

PLATE 19

A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons E~rcavated

141

the surface to be a number of single graves near one an~
other. Excavation revealed that it consisted of six skeletons in a small space, surrounded by a rock "fence" (Figure 5, D). This "fence" was buried approximately four
inches, although a few stones were evident on the surface. The burial plo~ is in the form of an oval nineteen feet
long and sixteen feet wide, the long axis runs east and
west. A "door" or unfinished gap six feet wide exists in
the south south-east side. The "fence" was built of a single
course of fiat limestone rocks, averaging one foot by eighteen inches by six inches in size. The rocks were placed
flat on the ground and end to end.
Skeleton One is a child. It had been buried before Skeleton Two. In the process of burying Skeleton Two, the
Child’s bones were disarticulated, and were found in the
grave fill of Skeleton Two. Intermingled with the bone
fragments of the child were the fragments of two slightly
curved tubes, engraved with geornetrical lines at each end
and banded at the center, Figure 5, B. Some wear or
polish was evident on the interior surface of each end of
the tubes. The size, shape, ornamentation, and wear of this
pair of bone tubes indicates that possibly they were the
handles of a large basket.
In the mathematical center of this oval was found Skeleton Two, at a depth of eighty-five cm. This adult female
was tightly flexed on the left side, with the left hand to the
face, and the head in the direction of the "door" in the
"fence." There were no artifacts associated with Skeleton
Two. A few limestone slabs were vertical against the walls
of the grave.
Skeleton Three, that of an adult male, lay three and onehalf feet west of Skeleton Two, at a depth of seventy-five
cm. It was flexed on the left side, with the right hand to
the face, and the head to the south. One artifact was
found; a notched and incised marine shell pendant (Figure
5, C, a and b). The small end of the pendant was touching
the sacrum, indicating of a burial offering which was drop-

142

Texas Archaeological and Paleontologica~ Society

ped .into the grave just prior to closing it. The skull ,of
Skeleton Three contains the Inca or interparietal bone, which
is large and very well defined from the occipital bone
(Plate 19, A).
Skeleton Four and Five were infants associated with
Skeleton Three of this burial group. They were placed
on the chest and pelvis of the adult male. Both infants had
their heads to the east, and were ina flexed,position:
Skeleton Six is a young female. It lay on the same
level with Skeleton. Three with the skull six inches south
of the skull of Skeleton Three. The. axis Of the skeleton was
north-east to southwest..The left arm was crossed over the
abdomen. Three or four inches west of the chin, just in
front of the right humerus, lay a shell pendant (Figure 5, C,
c). This pendant was made of a fresh water mussel shell
and had been broken at each end, after which the broken
edges, were smoothed and new holes drilled for cords. The
small end pointed toward the head, indicating that it was
W6rn with the wide end down.
Summary: There seems to be a correlation between this
site and the Sand Dune Culture as is evidenced by typological similarity of projectile points.
The group had trade relations with the coast as is indicated by the marine shell pendant.
The site seems to have been occupied for a long period
of time, but the frequency of occupation cannot be determined.
,Two individuals died unnatural deaths, presumably caused
by projectile points in the body.
All of the adult crania: were dolicocephalic, or long
headed, Chart 1.

A Series o~ Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated

:143

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL CACHE FROM THE

HUECO BASIN, TEXAS
M~s. GLENN

E. Moo~E

and
M~s..TOE BEN WHEAT
In January, 1937, a cache of pottery and associated artifacts was found on the old Tobin Ranch 11~ miles northeast of El Paso, Texas. The discovery was made in the
course of survey work initiated by Mr. and Mrs. Glen E.
Moore in the summer of 1936 and work has continued intermittently to the present time.
Before proceeding wi~h a discussion of the material recovered from this cache, we should like to acknowledge
valuable assistance given by the following persons: for
classification of pottery types, Dr. Emil W. Haury of the
University of Arizona, Mr. E. B. Sayles of the Arizona
State Museum, and Mr. Stanley Stubbs of the Laboratory
of Anthropology, Santa Fe, Mexico; for classification of
stone and shell specimens, Mr. W. S. Strain of Texas Western College; for photography and editing, Mr. Joe Ben
Wheat of the University of Arizona. We wish to express
special gratitude to Mr. Moore for his careful and tireless
efforts in excavating this material.
The site is located in the northern part of the Hueco
Basin, approximately in the center of the area defined by
Lehmer (1948) as the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon Culture. In this area the alluvial fill of the Hueco Basin consists of bolson deposits which rise to meet the foothills of
the Hueco Mountains on the east and the Franklin Mountains on the west. These deposits slope away gently to the
south where they are intersected by the channel of the
Rio Grande River. The local landscape is comprised of
stabilized dunes, termed "bondocks" by the ranchers of the
vicinity, with interver~’ing small drainageways which, terminating in shallow depressions, probably formed the primary source of water for the aboriginal inhabitants. There

An Archeological Cache ~rom ~he Hueco Basin, Texas

145

is little vegetation in the area other than mesquite, creosote
bush, and other forms of the Lower Sonoran Desert fh,ra.
Archeo!ogically, the area has been investigated from time
to time, but little intensive work has been done. Many of
the sites have suffered disturbance from the hands of pothunters. Published work includes papers by Stallings,
1932; Carey, 1931; Bradfield, 1929; Roberts, 1929; the Cosgroves, 1947; Sayles, 1935, 1936a, 1936b; Stubbs, 1930; Moore,
1947; Lehmer, 1948; Alves, 1930 et seq.; and Kidder and Cosgrove, 1949.

Many of these investigations have been concerned with
the Cave Dweller sites rather than the small pueblo sites
of the Basin area. Pottery bearing sites of the Basin include pithouses, small house structures, rubbish heaps, and
occasional sherd areas. Non-ceramic sites are sometimes
found in blowouts among the sand dunes.
The cache herein described was concentrated in an area
1.50 m. wide by 2.00 m. long and about 0.75 m. deep, and
contained the following artifacts:
Pottery vessels: 17
1 whole
13 restorable
3 unrestorable
Stone artifacts: 12
3 large round stones flattened on two opposing faces
3 stone balls
3 rectangular tabular objects
1 leaf-shaped sandstone object
2 stone beads
Turquoise
21
55
14
15

whole pendants
beads
nodules
fragments, worked and unworked

Te~ ArchaeoI~gica~ a~d P~leo~tolog~ca~ ~ociet~

Shell
1,431 olivella shell beads (2 incised)
6,029 flat discoidal white shell beads
1 vermetus tube bead
1 pink shell bead
4 geometric nacreous shell pendants
1 zoomorphic nacreous shell pendant
10 marginally perforated pelecypod shells
1 fragmentary glycymeris shell bracelet
Miscellaneous
8 polished pebbles
3 chalcedony concretions
When the cache was discovered, the rims of 5 ollas were
weathering from the sand matrix. All of these had roug!~ly circular breaks in their bottoms, perhaps indicating intentional "killing" of the vessels in the Mimbres tradition.
These ollas had been placed upright in a group over the
other artifacts. Immediately beneath them, and extending to a depth of approx’.h:nately 0.60 m. below the surface,
were the remains of 12 other vessels, only one of which was
whole, the other 11 apparently having been intentionally
smashed.
The single whole vessel was a small E1 Paso Polychrome
olla which contained the following artifacts:
500
55
21
2
1
1
1
10

flat disc shell beads
turquoise beads
turquoise pendants
spire ground olivella shells with incised decoration
pink shell bead
gray stone bead
green stone bead
small pelecypod shell pendants perforated at the
hinge
4 cut shell pendants
14 pieces of turquoise, 7 of which were polished. Four
of these 7 pieces were pendant-shaped but were
not perforated; 1 was round, and 2 were roughly
rectangular.

An Archeological Cache ~rom the Hueco Basin, Texas

147

Also within the group of. artifacts resting beneath the
5 ollas was a container formed of 2 large sherds placed
together in a manner resembling a bivalve, and enclosing
200 spire ground olivella shell beads.
PoPery
Four distinct wares are represented by the 17 pottery
vessels recovered from the cache. Three of these wares,
Chihuahua, E1 Paso Polychrome, and Chupadero, are indi~
genous to the area, while the fourth, Tucson Polychrome.
is instrusive from the west. Chihuahua wares comprise 76%
of the entire collection and include the following types:
l~amos Polychrome1, 7 vessels; Ramos Incised~, i vessel;
Villa Ahumada,1 2 vessels. Three jars were identified as
Chihuahua ware~ but were not definitely classifiable as tO
type. E1 Paso Polychrome, 2 vessels (12%), Chupadero, 1
vessel (6%), and Tucson Polychrome, 1 vessel (6%) make
up remainder of the collection.
CHIHUAHUA WARES, Painted
Rarnos Polychrome Human Effigy of hooded type, Plate
20. a.
Height: front, 18.5 cm.; back, 13.0 cm.
Diameter at widest part: 14.0 cm.
Human facial features modeled in relief and outlined
in paint on upward extension of rim which covers approximately half of normal rim circumference and drops
vertically behind each ear to meet the normal rim; eye and
mouth openings represented by straight, narrow slits; circular hole 1.5 cm. in diameter behind each ear.
Decoration is applied with red and black paints on a
buff colored background. Body decoration, beginning about
1.5 cm. below the normal rim, consists of red and black
lines, tapering triangles, opposed stepped keys in balanced
colors, and interlocking bent lines. The panelled band of
design elements extends well down toward the full rounded

1.

Stubbso personal conference, 1948.

2.

Sayles, Medallion Papers XXI, 1936.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

148

bottom and is terminated by a heavy black line.
(?) in bottom.

Kill hole

Ramos Polychrome Jar, Plate 20 b.
Height: 15.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, slightly out-curved, 10.5 cm.; body, 22.5 cm.
The neck of this jar rests on the flattened upper portion
of the body which forms a shoulder, or bench, 2.5 cm. wide;
from this the fully rounded, globular body slopes to a
rounded bottom.
Decoration with red and black paints on a warm tan background consists of the following design elements: interlocking steps, tapering triangles, and the club element. A single
pattern contains a bird done in red and black, and has
small rectangles filled with black brush dots. Heavy black
banding lines enclose the decoration which starts just
above the flat shoulder and covers approximately two-thirds
of the jar. Tt~ere is no panelling of designs. Kill hole
(?) in bottom.
Ramos Polychrome Jar, Plate 20 c.
Height: 20.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, slightly out-curved, 11.5 cm.; body, 24.2
em.

Red and black paints on light tan background; designs,
well executed in balanced colors, consist of the club element, triangles, and elongated steps. The colors are very
bright and clear, and the highly polished surface shows no
sand blasting or other deterioration from weathering. The
decoration, framed by narrow black lines, is a two-panel
band covering the upper two-thirds of the vessel. Full
rounded bottom with kill (?) hole.
Ramos Polychrome Jar, Plate 20, d.
Height: 24.2 cm.
Diameter: rim, 14.0 cm.; body, 27.0 cm.
Red and black paints on light cream background; colors
very faded, the red showing a distinct orange hue. Decoration consists of a two-panel design, each panel having club

PLATE 20
Chihuahua Pottery.
a-v Ramos Polychrome.
f-g Villa Ahumada Polychrome.
h-i Unidentified types.

An Archeological Cache ~rorn $he Hueco Basin, Texas

151

elements in triangles and attached to hatched triangles; a
checker-board with black squares opposing the cream colored background; and a simple coil with a black dot in
the center. The decoration covers the upper two-thirds of
the jar but does not have the continuous black framing
lines above and below, as do the other Ramos Polychromes.
Full rounded bottom with kill (?) hole.
Ramos PoIychrome Jar, Plate 20, e.
Height: 23.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, 11.5 cm.; body, 25.5 cm.
Red and black two-panel design on light tan background.
Due to the complexity of this design, the two panels will
be described separately. These panels are divided by black
pendant triangles arranged in two opposing rows with a red
line between. The serpent pattern (shown in photograph)
has a black head and a red body with black framing lines
which continue beyond the red body to form a tail (?) composed of 163 small rectangles, each having a black dot in the
center. The frame enclosing this panel is composed of red
and black opposed tapering triangles, black hatched triangles, and solid red and black triangles ending in an
interlocking scroll with balanced colors. The other panel
shows a large red spiral with black framing lines which converge to form a single line connecting two solid black
triangles at opposite sides of the spiral. One corner of the
panel shows a hatched triangle in red, with a similar pattern done in black in the opposite corner. The other two
corners are filled in with pendant triangles in black and
red. The entire design, which covers only the upper half
of the jar, is framed above and below by two continuous
lines, one black and one red. Full rounded bottom with
kill (?) hole.
Ramos Polychrome: Two unrestorable vessels not shown.
Villa Ahumada PoIychrome Jar, Plate 20, f.
Height: 21.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, 13.0 cm., body, 23.5 cm.
Vivid red and black panelled design on a warm, reddish
tan background.

Due to missing sherds and obliteration

152

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

of~ much of the design, it is not possible to give a full or
accurate description of this vessel. The design elements include tapering triangles in solid colors, opposed black and
red pendant triangles, and heavy lines in black and red.
There are no continuous independent ~aming lines either
above or below the zone of decoration which covers the
upper two-thirds of the vessel. The bottom part of the jar~
below the zone of decoration, shows a highly polished brown
slip noticeably darker than the upper part of the vessel.
Full rounded bottom with kill (?) hole.
Villa Ahumada Polychrome Jar, Plate 20. g.
Height: 21.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, slightly flared, 12.0 cm.; body, 23.5 cm.
Dense black and red designs on light tan background.
Design elements include solid black and red triangles, opposed black and red tapering triangles enclosed by red
bands 1.5 cm. wide and outlined by a narrow black band,
and the club element with a "suggestion of animation in
the use of an ovoid (my word) enclosing a dot."’ The dec:
oration, covering approximately two-thirds of the jar, is in
three panels with continuous independent black framing
lines above and below. The vessel has a full rounded bottom with a very small kill (?) hole.
Chihuahua Wares unidentified as to type
PoIychrome Jar, Plate 20, i.
Height: 21.6 cm.
Diameter: rim, 12.5 cm.; body, 23.0 cm.
Symmetrical two-panel design in black and a very little
red over a polished light tan slip. Zone of decoration covers
upper half of jar and has continuous double framing lines
in black above and below. Design elements consist of heavy
black hatched and solid black pendant triangles, tapering
triangles of solid black and heavy hatching, negative interlocking keys, and the "club" element. Red appears only in
a series of small triangles outlined in black and abutting a
: 1.

Sayles, Medal]ion Papers XXI.

1936

An Archeological Cache ~rorn the Hueco Basin, Texas

153

rectangular design of solid black and black hatched pendant
triangles. Much of the decoration on this jar has been obliterated and it is thus impossible to give a complete and accurate description of design elements. The vessel has a globular shape and a full rounded bottom with a large kill (?)
hole.
Black-on-tan Jar, Plate 20, h.
Height: 22.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, 11.5 cm.; body, 30.0 cm.
Intricate geometric two-panel design in black on a light
tan background. Design elements consist of solid black
pendant triangles opposing black hatched pendant triangles,
hatched and solid black tapering triangles, opposed step designs in both hatch work and solid black, and black fine
line spirals. The zone of decoration, beginning at the neck,
extends slightly below the middle of the body and is
framed above and below with two continuous black lines.
The surface of "this vessel has a high polish. The extremely
fine and intricate line work on this jar is not approximated
on any of the other vessels in this collection. The kill (?)
hole is roughly circular and measures 7.0 cm. in diameter.
Black-on-white Jar, Plate 20, j.
Height: 15.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, 11.0 cm.; body, 19.0 cm.
Black designs on a chalky white slip which completely
Covers outside surface of jar. The design area, framed by
heavy black lines above and below, ~ontains two rows of
black finely hatched triangles complemented by solid black
tapering triangles. This vessel has a slightly flaring .r~m, a
constricted neck, and a fu~lr0unc~ed bottom with one, and
possibly two, small kill (?) holes.
EL PASO POLYCHROME
Miniature olla, Plate 21, a.
HeigHt: 4.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, 3.5 ~m.; body, ~4.5 cm.
Crudely shaped and finished miniature jar with three
broad black encircling bands over a fugitive red wash

154

Texas Archeolog~cal and paleontological Society

which covers the upper half of the body. Full rounded
bottom undecorated. This small vessel contained a tota~l of
609 stone and shell artifacts, listed previously in this article.
Double Jar connected by hollow tube and arched handle,
Plate 21, b.
Height: jars, 11.5 cm.; arched handle, 14.5 cm.
Diameter: jar rims, 9.5 cm.; bodies, 13.0 cm.
Width: handle, 5.25 cm.; tube, 5.5 cm.
Length, overall: 27.0 cm.
Two olla type units with constricted necks and flaring
rims, connected by a hollow tube and a broad arching
handle. Decoration consists of thin black splotches applied over fugitive red wash which covers upper half of
body and top side of handle; black band around interior of
rims, extending into "V"-shaped pattern on handle; narrow
black band on outside of rim; under side of handle and top
of connecting tube are black; broad black framing line below zone of decoration; lower half of vessel is undecorated.
TUSCON POLYCHROME1
Bowl, Plate 21, c.
Heigh: 15.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, 27.0 cm.; body, 28.0 cm.
Very slightly recurred rim; heavy red slip over entire
vessel, highly polished; no interior decoration. Exterior
decoration consists of five identical interlocking units formed
by broad angular lines of black outlined in white, and
cross-hatching in small rectangular areas, also outlined in
white. Zone of decoration, beginning at rim and covering
upper two-thirds of vessel, is framed above and below by
broad black lines outlined in white.
CHUPADERO
Black-on-white WaGer lug, Plates 21, d and e.
Height: Indeterminate.
Diameter: rim, 9.0 cm.; neck, 6.4 cm.
So little of this vessel was recovered that complete di-

1.

Identified by Haury.

An Archeological Cache ~rom the Hueco Basin, Texas

157

mensions cannot be determined. Decoration consists of
opposed solid black and hatched elements separated by
framed but unpainted rectangles, alternating black and
white bands separating panel units and framing decoration
above and below; two broad black bands around neck.
Double coiled handle joins neck and shoulder; black neck
bands do not extend over handles.
CHIHUAHUA WARE, Textured
Ramos Incised (?) Plate 21, f.
Height: 22.3 cm.
Diameter: rim, 19.5 cm.; neck, 16.5 era.; body, 80.0 cm.
Incised redware with globular body, constricted neck,
and slightly flaring rim. Approximately 2.0 cm. below
the rim is a band of indentations 3.4 cm. wide. This
blends into the upper edge of the incised design which is
composed of alternating hatched and open triangles. The
bottom half of the jar is undecorated. The paste of this
vessel is very dark and friable, and closely resembles E1
Paso Polychrome paste. Missing sherds make it impossible
to determine whether or not this jar had been "killed."
Stone Art~facts
Discoidal Stones, Plate 22, a-c.
Three well shaped, polished, discoidal stones were found
among the broken pottery vessels about 30 cm. below the
surface. While these stones are somewhat various as to
size and shape, their over-all similarity suggests a common cultural function. Basically, they are of cylindrical
shape’ with convex sides. Each is flattened on top and
bottom, the upper surfaces having in the center a small
circular depression 15 mm. in diameter and 2 mra. in depth.
Plate 22, a: Limestone, incised design on body.
Height: 17.0 cm.
Diameter: top, 16.0 cm.; widest part, 18.0 cm.; bottom,
12.5 cm.
1. Diameters taken from different points o~ the circumference may vary as
much as 2cm. All diameters given here are ~aken at the widest l)Oint.

158

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

This stone has three design units spaced irregularly around
the body. Two of these are the conventional "altar" or step
design. The third is a half circle beginning and ending near
the base of the stone, the highest point reaching approximately to the middle. This element extends almost to the
base of one of the "altars" and is separated from the other
by a wide space with two parallel oblique lines, Figure 6,
a-d.
Plate 22, b: Dolomitic limestone, no decoration.
Height: 15.5 cm.
Diameter: top, 14.5 cm.; widest part, 19.5 cm.; bottom,
10.0 cm.
Plate 22, c: Do!omitic limestone, no decoration.
Height: 12.1 cm.
Diameter: top, 11.8 cm.; widest part, 15.2 cm.; bottom,
10.0 cm.
SCone Bal~s, Plate 22, d-f.
Three roughly spherical stone balls were found with the
pottery and discoidal stones described above. Specimens
d and f are of limestone, well rounded and polished; e is
crudely shaped of red rhyolite.
Diameters:" d, 7.0 cm.; e, 7.0 cm.; f, 5.0 cm.
Rectangular Tabular Stones, Plate 22, g-i.
Three tabular stone objects accompanied the artifacts described above. These are basically rectangular in shape and
are carefully worked, the edges being smoothed. The faces
show no abrasion. Specimen g is made of sandy shale; b_
and i are of dolomitic limestone.
Specimen g: length, 10.0: cm.; .width, 6.0 cm.; thickness,
8.0 mm.
Specimen h: length, 9.0 cm.; width, 5.0 to 7.25 cm.; thickness, 1.0 cm.
Specimen i: length, 8.0 cm.; width, 6.5 cm.; thickness,
8.0 mm.

PLATE 22
ObjecLs of s~)ne and shell.

See text for measurernenLs and description.

An Archdological Cache~rom the Hueco Basin, Texa~

161

.Legal-shaped Sandstone Object (not illustrated.)
Both faces well smoothed three contiguous rough breaks
around wide end, all other edges worked smooth.

Length,

17.5 cm.; width, 12.5 cm.; thickness, 6.0 ram.
Stone Beads, plate 22, m and n.
Specimen m: Green stone, unidentifiable.
Diameter of bead, 5.0 mm.; perforation, 0.5 ram.

T~ckness, i.0
Specimen n: Gray stone, unidentifiable.
Diameter Of b~ad, 3.0 ram.; perforation, 0.5 ram.
Thickness, 0.5 mm.
Turquoise:
Pendants, Plate 22, j. These range in shape from trape
zoidal through rectangular to oval. One specimen is triang~la~ With the perforation at the base r~ther than at the
apex ~f the triangle. Twenty-one are complete, the remaining 15 fragmentary. Most are of good color and are well
polished. Sizes range from 7.0 mm. to 18.0 mm. in length;
5.0 ram. to 10.5 ram. in width; and 1.5 ram. to 4.0 mm. in
thickness.
Disc Beads, Plate 22, 1. These are all approximately 7.0
mm. in diameter and 2.0 mm. in thickness. The cen~er
perforation averages 2.0 mm. in diameter.
Unpolished Nodules, Plate 22, k.
which show little or no work.

Angular fragments

Shell Ar~iSacts
Shell ornaments recovered .from the cache and the surroun~ding sand matrix total 7,477.
Beads
OlivelIa: 1,431 spire ground shell beads (Plate 22, o.),
a~era~ing 14,0 mm. in length and 8.0 mm~in diameter. Two
of these, incised with simple geometric: designs (Plate 22,

162

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

~

c

f

FIGURE 6
a-d.

Det~i]~ of design elernent~ on discoidal stone.

(See also Plate 22, a. p, and ~t.)

p and q; also Figure 6, f and g) were fou~nd in the small E1
Paso Polychrome olla; 200 were in the sherd container described previously; the others were recovered from the surface and from the sand in and around the cache.
Disc Beads: 6,029 fiat discoidal white shell beads (Plate
22, r) vary from 3.0 mm. to 5.0 mm. in diameter and from
0.5 mm. to 2.0 mm. in thickness. Five hundred of these, and
the one pink disc bead (Plate 22, s), were contained in the
small olla; the others were on the surface and scattered
throughout the sand around the cache.
Vermetus Tube Bead, Plate 22, t.
Pendants: Five nacreous shell pendants were recovered
from the cache. Four of these (Plate 22, u and v) were
in the small olla. The two shown at u are of triangular
shape with the perforation at the rounded apex. These
measure 20.0 ram. in basal width and 22.0 mm. in length.
The other two, shown at v, are of ovoid shape, marginally
perforated at the center of the long axis. These measure
25.0 mm. in length and 15.0 ram. in width. One zoomorphic
nacreous shell pendant (Plate 22, w) was found loose in the
sand. This ornament is marginally perforated near the center of the long axis. It measures 5.0 cm. in length and 2.0
cm. at the widest point, and is slightly convex in cross
section.
Ten Pelecypod shell pendants (Plate 22, x) were contained in the small olla. These measure approximately 16.0
ram. in length and the same in width; perforated at the

An Archeolog~caI Cache f~rom ~he Hueco Basin, Texas

hinge.

163

These shells are of a fluted variety but have been

worn practically smooth.
Bracelet, Plate 22, y.

One incomplete Glycyrneris shell

bracelet was recovered frem the loose sand fill.
Miscellaneous Artifacts
Eight polished pebbles of various size, shape, and color,
and three bluish-white chalcedony concretions were found
in the loose fill of the cache. The pebbles are naturally
shaped but display all-over polishing. They are smaller
than the usual pottery polishing stones.
SUMMARY
The cache herein described yielded a total of 7,625 artifacts including utility items, ornaments, and perhaps ceremonial objects. In a review of the literature on the E1 Paso
area, and in personal discussions with numerous archeologists and collectors, no account of a similar concentration
of artifacts in this area has been found.
Pottery is predominantly of the Chihuahua wares, and
all types represented are known to occur in the late Pueblo
III-Pueblo IV sequence. All types of beads recovered from
the cache are commonly found in this area, usually on the
surface or in refuse heaps, but not in large numbers. Shell
pendants occur less .frequently on the surface; further excavation may or may not prove them to be a common element in the prehistoric culture of this region.
The stone artifacts from this cache present a more ponderous problem. Both professional and amateur archeologists have examined this collection, but as yet, no familiarity with these types of artifacts has been revealed.
The cache was located in an open area sloping gently
to the southwest. Excavation was continued to sterile clay,
and the surrounding area was trenched to the north, east,
south, and west, to a distance of approximately 2 m. No
evidence of dwelling or burial was found.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES IN CUSTER
COUNTY, OKLAHOMA
BY HAROLD D. BRIGHTON

This report is intended to present data about six prehistoric Indian village sites located in Custer county, Oklahoma.
Custer county is situated in the western and central part of
Oklahoma, and since little archaeological information is
available for the western section of the state, this brief
contribution should be welcome.
A total of six sites are herein considered, Goodman II,
Shahan I and II, McLaugh!in I and II and Williams I.
All of the sites are to be found within the Washita River
valley in the southern part of Custer county in the vicinity
.of Stafford, Oklahoma.l The sites in question were surveyed and examined by a cooperative archaeological project sponsored by the Department of Anthropology at the
University of Oklahoma and the Federal Government
under the Works Progress Administration. Dr. Forrest E.
Clements was responsible for the field survey, and excavations were under the immediate supervision of Mr. Lynn
Howard, at that time a graduate student at the University.
The survey and excavations were conducted in 1941. The
specimens, reports and data upon which this report is based
are now in the collections of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Oklahoma Museum at Norman.2
Goodman 1I Site (cu-2)
The Goodman II site was brought to the attention of the
University by Mr. Boone Goodman, who had picked up a
,considerable amount of surface material in the plowed
field just south of his house. The site is located on the
Goodman farm one-half mile west and one-fourth mile south
of Stafford, Oklahoma.~ The site is situated upon a river
terrace which rises above the flood plain of the Washita
1.
One additional site is reported as Goodman I by Art Gallaher elsewhere in thi~
journal.
2.
Acknowledgment for aid in preparing this rel~ort is hereby extended to
Willis Stovall, Director of the University Museum, Mr. Ralph Shead, Dr. Robert
Bell, Chairman Department of Anthropology, Dr. Karl Schmitt and :Mr. Art Gallaher.

Archeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

165

River bottoms. At the present time the river flows perhaps
one-half a mile east of the site on the opposite side of the
valley, although at the time of habitation, it may have been
closer to the occupation area. The Goodman I site is also
located in the same area and upon the same farm, being
separated from Goodman II merely by a few hundred
yards distance. In view of the proximity of these two habitation areas and the fact that the cultural materials from
both are similar, both Goodman I and Goodman II probably
represent different sections of the same village.
Two areas were excavated at the Goodman II site: both
localities having some evidences for aboriginal house structures. The excavations were conducted by horizontal stripping within a grid system based upon ten foot squares.
The various squares were excavated by arbitrary levels four
inches in depth to reveal any stratigraphy that might be
indicated. No significant differences appear in the materials
from the various levels, and it is believed that a single
occupation is represented by the site.
Evidences of houses are found in both excavation areas
although in neither case could the outline or perimeter of
the houses be detected. Both areas are marked by village
debris, fire pits, deposits of wattle and other features.
Excavation area No. 1 contains a circular fire place about
one and one-half feet in diameter. Surrounding this fire
basin were five small features which are reported as cache
pits in the field records. The size o~ these pits, however,
as well as their position suggest that post holes are represented. The pits are about one foot in diameter and one
to one and one-half feet in depth, much smaller than one
would expect for a typical cache pit. Since the nearby
Goodman I site produced similar pits which were recognized
as being center posts for a house structure, it is suggested
that post holes are represented in this case. Iqo wall posts
or additional features other than wattle are reported for
this locality.
Excavation area No. 2 contains a fireplace, four cache
pits and an easily discernable house floor. No post holes

166

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

HOUSE I

GOODMAN

’17

I
t

Key -

]

HOUSE 2

Ex;,nt of

]
Polthole~

GOODMAN

FIGURE 7
House Plans of Goodman IL

were found. The fireplace is irregular in outline but marked
by burned clay and filled with matted ashes and charcoal.
The cache pits are circular in outline, from two and onehalf to three and one-half feet in diameter and from three
to four feet in depth. Cache pit No. 2, for example, is
three feet in diameter and extends to a depth of three feet
beneath the surface. It contained a metate fragment, one

ArcheologicaI Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

167

grit tempered pottery sherd and seventy small fragments
of broken animal bones.
Throughout the excavation occasional artifacts are found
which give insight into the cultural complex of the Goodman II site. Since the specimen inventory is~ limited, both
excavated and surface materials are treated together in the
following discussion.
Chipped Stone Objects
Chipped stone artifacts include projectile points, a variety
of scrapers, a drill, a flake knife, and three fragments which
are presumably from knives. In addition many flint spalls
or flakes are found which do not appear to have been
worked, merely representing the debris from chipping or unmodified flakes.
Two small projectile points were found, both a different
type. One is an elongated side notched triangular point
with a slightly concave base. The second point, although
damaged, is a broad, triangular, urmotched form having a
convex base.
Scrapers are the most common flint tool, and appear to
represent two major types, a snub-nosed or end scraper,
and the side scraper. All of the scrapers are rather small
in size, few being over one inch in length. The end sc~pers are represented by three examples, all chipped from
flat flakes with blunt retouching at one end. The side
scrapers are represented by eight small irregular flakes
which have had slight secondary chipping along one slde
to produce a scraping edge. The shape of the scraper seems
to be dependent upon the original form of the flint flake
from which it was made, no attempt being made to produce
a uniform type of tool.
A single narrow spall of flint has been rechipped along
one side to produce a sharp cutting edge and was presumably used as a knife. Another single chipped specimen
represents a drill or perforating tool. It has not been carefully chipped and the base remains irregular and unmodified by secondary chipping. There are three small frag-

168

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ments of what may represent knives or other unfinished
artifacts.
Many of the flint artifacts have been burned as evidenced
by the fire scar fractures present on the surfaces. It is
interesting to note that much of the material is derived from
the extensive quarries north of Amarillo, Texas, and can
be recognized as the Alibates flint.
Ground Stone Objects
There are two stone implements which occurred in excavation area No. 2. The larger of these, a broken metate,
is made from an elongated red granite boulder measuring
ten inches in. length and five inches in width. The upper
surface of the metate shows the usual basin like depression
characteristic of these items. The smaller object is a long
rectangular awl sharpener of sand-stone. This implement
has been used for sharpening bone awls or pointea fools,
since the narrow grooves running linearly along its surface
are triangular in cross-section.
Bone Objects
The only bone item found is very fragmentary and was
removed from the fire pit in excavation area No. 2. Several
pieces of a buffalo scapula which are evidently part of a
single hoe were recovered. Some of the pieces show the
signs of smoothing and rubbing typical of the scapula hoe.
No evidences for the manner of halting can be noted.
Pottery
There are one hundred and thirty fragments of pottery,
which in general are rather crude and poorly manufactured. Most of the pottery came from excavation area No.
2. From a technical standpoint, many of the sherds indicate wide coils poorly welded together and an excessive
amount of coarse tempering material The surface finish
is rather carelessly done, many sherds bearing marks and
scraping scars. Almost all of the sherds have been tempered with either caliche or a combination of caliche and
grit. The tempering material varies considerably in size

ArcheoIog~cal Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

169

of the particles, some sherds havfiag fragments up to six
mm. in size, others having finely pulverized granules. The
grains of tempering material seemingly are roughly correlated with the thickness of the sherds, and hence perhaps with vessel size, the thick heavy sherds containing large
particles and the thinner sherds having the caliche more
finely ground. The sherds are most commonly a plain
surfaced ware although some cord-marked wares are present. A single sherd has two small clay nodes attached to the
surface. It is impossible to determine the actual vessel
shape from the sherds represented even though some pieces
are obviously portions of a flares type rim.
The pot~.ery from the Goodman II site is similar to "~hat
identified b~ Gallaher as Stafford Plain and Staffor~ Cordmarked.3 The single noded sherd is similar to Stafford
PZain in all characteristics except the presence of the nodes.
Out of the one hundred and thirty sherds represented, one
hundred and twenty are Stafford Plain, nine are Sta~ford
Cordmarked and the noded: sherd is unique.
The single noded sherd is of interest because it resembles
sherds from archaeological sites on the Washita River in
central Oklahoma. The sherd suggests that it came from
a wide mouthed globular jar having a flaring neck. The
two attached nodes appear on the vessel wall jus~ below
the neck of the pot. Although this application of fillets or
nodes of clay upon the vessel surface is not common, several
specimens have been found at various sites in the Washita
River focus.
Shahan I Site (Cu-3)
The Shahan I site is crossed by the Rock Island Railroad
near the Washita River on the Shahan farm about four
miles south of Stafford, Oklahoma. The excavation, whic~h’
was also under the direction of the University of Oklahoma,
was contemporary with the work on the Goodman sites.
Horizontal stripping with a ten foot square grid system
3.

Gallaher, op. cit.

170

Texas Archeological and paleontological Society

and levels of four inches was again utilized in digging this
site. Only twelve ten foot squares were excavated and ~lue
to the scarcity of the material, both the surface finds and
the excavated items were jointly considered in this report.
No houses or other village features were found, however,
the site was not exposed to an exhaustive study a~d some
such evidence may occur in the undisturbed portion of
this area.
Chipped Stone Objects
The chipped stone series contain four types of scrapers,
including the two types at the Goodman II site and two
others. The most abundant variety is the plain end scraper.
Some of the side scrapers are modified into a curved variety
and these are rather crudely chipped. Knives and projectile pointS are also found on the site.
In addition to these, the Shahan I site produced a type,
which is tentatively termed a pointed scraper. There are six
of this variety. To produce the pointed scraper, two edges
join at one corner, making an angle of less than ninety
degrees. These edges show secondary chipping while the
Other rough edges are untouched. These are usually made
from flakes and have a varying size, ranging from one inch
to two and one-half inches in width or length, usually Being
as wide as they are long.
Scrapers are the most common flint item at this site.
The snub-nosed or end scrapers and the pointed variety are
the most common types. Most scrapers are small and some
are less than one inch in length. The snub-nosed or end
scrapers are sixteen in number. Six of these are chipped
from flat flakes with rechipping at one end representing
the snub-nosed type, but ten are made from cores with secondary chipping at one end. The side scrapers are made
from small flakes with one of the edges retouched. The
original shape of the flake is unaltered and consequently the
shape of this type is quite variable.
Two implements seem to have been used as knives. Both
of these are fragmentary and quite small. A single narrow

PLATE 23
Specimens from Caster County Sites.
All artifacts are actual size with the
tlon of the Dot.
The scale for it is 1 inch equals 5 inches.
L Perforated lag for
string support. (Ca-6).
2, A noded strap handle, (Ca-7).
3. Incised Dot sherd,
(Ca-5).
4. Noded shoulder and rim sherd, (Ca-2).
5, Large c6rdmarked caliche
tempere<l rim and shoulder sherd, (Ca-6).
6. Large storage jar of Stafford Plain
ware. (Ca-4).
7. Incised pot sheed, (Ca-4).
8. Finger nail punctuat~l sherd, (Ca-4).
9. Stippled of punctuate sherd, (Ca-6),
10. Projectile points (from aDDer left to
lower right).
A~ wide hssc~l bl~lnt pointed side notched point. (Ca-3), trianffular
tlr~riint, ,(Ca-6): conc.a,ve,based point. (,Ct~-3), triangalar side notched point.
rlangular siae notcae~ point, (Cu-7). round based side notched point, (Cu-2L
II. Sandstone awl sharpener. (Ca-4).- 12. Sandstone arrow shaft smoother, (Ca-2).
15. Narrow based, drill, (Ca-2).
14. Flared based drill, (Ca-7).
15. Irregular b~ed
short shanked drill, {Ca-7).
16. Narro~ bsst~l drill, {Ca-6).
17, Musical rasp fragm~]t, (Ca-7}. 18. S-shaDed knife, (Ca-7). 19, Flake knife: (Ca-5). 20. Flake knife,
{C~.6). 21. Fragment of a hmgltudi~al!y flaked knife~ (Co7). 22, Scapula hand h~e.
(CUe7). 23. S~uh-nosed scraper. (Ca-2), 24. Snuh-~osed scraper, (Cu-7). 25. Snub-nosed
scraDer, ~Cu-7), 26. Snt~b-~osed scraper, (Ca°4). 27. Snub-nosed scraper. (Ca°2).
28. End scraper. (Cue7). 29, Side scraper, (Ca-6). 30, Pointe<~ scraper.
31. Pointed scraper,
Editor’s N~te: This plate ~vas reduced to two-fii’ths its original ~ize.

ArcheologicaI Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

173

flake of flint is rechipped to produce a sharp cutting edge and
was presumably used as a knife. This fragment is about two
inches long. The other fragment is seemingly one end of
an alternate beveled diamond-shaped knife.
Four varieties of projectile points are found. Three triangular straight based examples are un-notched while another
un-notched triangular point has a convex base. One specimen has a wide, heavy, notched based with a short and
fairly blunt body. Another is basically triangular with a
convex base and an elongated body. All of these examples
are small, not exceeding one and one-half inches in length.
From the appearance of the remaining flint item, it was
possibly used as a drill. This specimen is extremely narrow
and oval in cross section with sharpening at the edges near
the pointed end only.
Many of the chipped stone artifacts in this series, like
some of those of the preceding Goodman II site, have been
made from Amarillo Alibates flint.
Ground Stone Objects
Only one ground stone fragment was found on the Shahan
I site. The fragment seems to be a portion of a stone muller,
being made of sandstone and oval in cross section. Flattening on one side has resulted from the manner in which th-.’s
stone was utilized. The stone has been fractured at one end
and the other end has a rounded appearance.
Bone Objects

A small burned fragment of a deer cannon bone was found
that had been highly polished. This specimen may have
been part of an awl, since the manufacture of awls from
this particular bone was quite common on the plains, but
it is so small that the exact use could not be ascertained.
Pottery

One hundred and seven pottery fragments were obtained
from the Shahan I site and these are astonishingly similar
to the Goodman II examples. The caliche or caliche and grit

!74

Texas Archeological and PaleOntological Socia~y

tempered wares again display a wide range of texture variation with the thick wares having the coarsest temper while
the thin pieces have finer tempering particles.

The surface

finish in the smooth examples is crudely produced with
smoothing marks on many 0f the sherds.
fragments are also crudely fashioned.

The cordmarked

One sherd has been

tempered with sand, and one has a mixture of caliche particles added to the sand. The former is smooth and the latter
is cordmarked. One small caliche tempered fragment is
incised but it is too small to determine any pattern design.
The shape of the vessels, as assumed from the appearance
of the body sherds and flared rim fragments, seem generally
rounded, however, definite form could not be determined
from the available specimens.
Shahan I pottery, like Goodman II, has a high frequency
of Stafford Plain ware and in addition, some Stafford Cordmarked. Of the one hundred and seven sherds, a total of
one hundred and four are Sta]ford Plain, while only two
Stafford Cordmarked examples were obtained. The two
sherds having sand temper are unique only in tempering
and to the naked eye they cannot be separated from the other
types.
The caliche tempered incised sherd could not be traced
to any adjacent group and is also unique~ for this site.
McLaughlin I Site (Cu-4)
The McLaughlin I site, or Cu-4, is three miles east and one
mile south of the Shahan II site. Work began in the area
on April 22, 1941 and was conducted contemporarily with
other sites in Custer County. The excavation procedure explained in the earlier sites was utilized on the McLaughlin I
site. Eight ten foot squares were excavated and surface
finds are included in the collections analyzed in this report.
There is reference in Mr. Howard’s report to traces of a
house, which presumably was not excavated as no other
mention of it occurs inhisfield data.

A~cheologicaI S~tes in Custer County, Oklahoma

175

Chipped Stone Objects
The flint artifacts included in the McLaughlin I sample
show a greater degree of refinement in chipping technique
than is found in the other sites reported; especially the
scrapers and the projectile points exemplify this higher development of chipping tradition.
The chipped stone items include projectile points, a drill,
a knife, and a variety of scrapers.
Four types of scrapers occur in the site. The snub-nosed
variety is manufactured from a concave flake, with chipping
on the convex surfaces, in the same manner as the Goodman II and Shahan I examples. Five of this type were
found.
The most abundant chipped stone objects are side scrapers. These are represented by ten scrapers. The size of
these vary as does their degree of chipping technique, some
being crudely produced and others being well done.
Three pointed scrapers were found with the surface material and are exceedingly small in size. These are produced in a similar way to those in the Shahan I material.
Projectile points are clearly evidenced by two fragments.
The first type is made from a concave flake and is chipped
only on one side, having a narrow rounded base with a
somewhat wider shoulder. The other point is the rear portion of a triangular shaped point. Both of these points are
small in size.
A piece of a drill, which is partly unfinished, wa~ included.
The base is wide as is the unfinished portion. The drill
shank is small and had been fractured about one-half inch
from the base.
/( long thin mid-section of a knife is included in the flint
items. The base is rounded and the edges are almost parallel
with an eliptical cross section. This piece has been chipped
on both surfaces and gives evidence of a refined chipping
technique.

176

Texas Arch~ologica~ and Paleontological Society

Ground Stone Objects
Three small arrowshaft smoothers, generally rectangular
in shape, occur on the site. Al! of these have probably been
used as smoothing devices for arrow shafts as the grooves in
them are semicircular.
The small mano fragment found could easily be identified
by its rectangular shape and is of the rectangular, biface
variety.
Bone Objects
Three small charred fragments of what possibly might
have been a bison scapula hoe were obtained, two of these
pieces show evidence of abrasion, so undoubtedly they have
been utilized for some endeavor.
Pottery

One hundred and twenty-nine sherds were found in the
McLaughlin I area. Surface finds include fifty of these
pieces. They are crudely manufactured and show evidence
of coil welding, which is not durable, as many of the sherds
have broken at the point of weld.
The caliche or caliche and grit sherds constitute ninetysix percent of the finds.
There are sixty-two sherds with
caliche, which varied greatly in coarseness, from flecks
almost invisible to some as large as six mm. in cross section. The caliche and grit sherds include sixty-one specimens and these also have a wide range of coarseness. These,
being smooth, constitute, along with the restorable jar,
the Stafford Plain portion of the sample. The remainder
of the series are StaS]ord Cordmarked with the six unique
pieces as exceptions. One small cordmarked sand tempered
sherd, which is very brittle, was found. Four grit tempered
sherds are included and in these the particles are very finely
ground. The one shell tempered piece is of medium coarseness in texture.
A small grit tempered incised fragment and a fingernail
punctated grit tempered fragment could not be traced to any
adjacent groups and may be unique or items of trade.

Archeologica~ Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

177

The six rim sherds are exceedingly small and give the
appearance of belonging to the flared rim variety. Most of
the series is included in the body sherd group. Judging
from these one hundred and twenty-three examples, the
majority of the vessels must have been round.
One large restorable storage jar was located on the site, being found partially on the surface and with fragments going
down to a depth of about six inches. This pot, found by the
survey party, was obtained in the vicinity of the house mentioned in the report. It has a rounded base and a wide
flared mouth. The vessel is twenty inches high and at its
maximum diameter is sixteen inches wide. Having a
smooth surface, the jar is about one centimeter in overall
thickness, and is caliche tempered. The rounded base is arranged so that overall body shape for the pot is not unlike
as inverted pear. In hardness, it tests at 4.5. The vessel is
now on exhibition in the University Museum.
McLaughlin II Site (Cu-5)
This site is referred to as the McLaughlin II site in the
Museum report and adjoins the site I area. Work was in
progress during the month of June in 1941 but definite
dates are not available for the excavations. The area was
staked out and excavated in the same manner as were the
previous sites. Fourteen ten foot squares were taken down
to a twenty inch depth, divided into five levels.
No houses are defined but a fire pit was discovered one
foot below the surface with traces of baked clay at its rim.
The walls are vertical and the bottom generally flat. This
pit is circular in overall appearance and two feet, eight
inches in diameter with a pit depth of one foot, four inches.
This feature was discovered one foot below the surface
so that its bottom is two feet, four inches below ground level.
At a depth of four and one half inches from the top of the
pit, two large rocks were located. One is a fragment of unworked stone and the other is a circular rock of ten and onehalf inches in diameter and one and three-fourths inches in
thickness, with the circular rock being smoothed on the

178

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

one side.

Two triangular notched points were associated

with these stones. Below the stones was a thick layer of ash
10 inches in depth.
Chipped Stone Objects
Included in the Chipped Stone series are knives, a variety
of scrapers, and projectile point types.

Many fragments of

unworked flint indicate discarded flakes or unworked pieces.
A small sample of flint was found on the McLaughlin II
site. Four classes of scrapers are included. One snub-nosed
type occurs and it had been manufactured in much the same
manner as those on the Goodman I or II series.
The group of ten side-scrapers are again rather crudely
fashioned and from an assorted selection of stone. These are
all small, not averaging more than one and three-fourths
inches in maximum length.
End scrapers here are variable in their manufacture. Two
are rather small while one is three inches in length but has
a small scraping edge. The other is triangular with the short
edge being chipped for scraping and making a total of four
end scrapers.
Two pointed scrapers were found, being produced in a
manner similar to those previously mentioned. ¯
Two small knives were obtained and these are not over
two inches long and three-fourth inch in width. These had
been produced from concave flakes, with chipping on the
upper surface extending completely around the flake. Both
knives have rounded corners and are finely chipped specimens.
The two projectile points are basically triangular.4 One
is flaked on both sides and without notching, but the other
is flaked on both sides, having two side notches and one
4.

Th~)ugli,

~tccordtng to

the

report,

three .points

should

be

available,

ov~ly

two

~f these are no~’ on hand in the laboratory. A few years after these sites were
excavated, some of the better worked items wdre rut on display during a
eolloquim. Following this event, some of the materials were misplaced,

Archeolog~ca! Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

basal notch.
long.

179

Both of these points are less than two inches
Ground Stone Objects

Of the five sandstone abraders found, two, by evidence of
their striations, are arrowshaft smoothers. The other three,
having triangular grooves, were probably utilized to sharpen
bone implements.
One rectangular mano stone occurred, it being fragmentary.
A fragment of a round hammer stone made of sandstone
was found which had been only slightly polished.
A smal! fragment of a stone pipe was found with the bowl
decorated by one concentric striation, one-fourth inch below
the top of the bowl. Subsequent striations came up and
into the bowl from this one. The bowl, itself, is one-fourth
inch in diameter with a height of 1¥4 inches. This item is
badly weathered, even though it was not found on the
surface.
Fragments of two fossil clam (Gryphaea) were located
at level 4 in the site. It is doubted whether these had any
significance to the Indians, however.
Bone Objects
Three fragmentary bison scapula hoes were found, but
not enough of ~he fragments were found for any of them to
be restored. A tubular bone bead one and one-fourth inches
long was included, which probably had been produced from
a bird bone.
Pottery
In the McLaughlin II area, two hundred and forty sherds
were found. Of these, sixty-six are surface finds. The
smoo~th finished caliche or caliche and grit ware again accounts for most of the series. There are one hundred and
eighteen smooth caliche tempered sherds with coarseness
ranging from finely ground, almost invisible particles, to
very large flecks.

180

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The smooth caliche and grit tempered sherds number one
hundred and fifteen and they too have a wide range of
coarseness.
marked.

The two sand tempered pieces are both .cord-

Five shell tempered smooth sherds are included

in the finds.

The smooth surfaced finds occur primarily

with grass or brush markings still evident.

However, the

five, smooth, shell tempered sherds do not show this tendency.

Eight cordmarked sherds are present in the afore-

mentioned sites.

All of the cordmarked series have been

smoothed, to a certain degree, and only two sherds show
this process in McLaughlin II. One incised sherd was found.
The body sherds seem to suggest a round shape but there
are no restorable pots in this series to confirm that fact.
Two flat top rim fragments were found. Parts of small
strap handles appear in some of the surface finds. In respect to hardness, there is a fairly equal classification in all
categories examined.
The Sta~Sord Plain and Sta~Sord Cordmarked traditions,
treated as smooth and cordmarked, are both found on the McLaughlin II site but tempering is varied to a certain degree. Five of the plain sherds show shell temper, which
is not so abundant in the other sites of the area.
The one incised fragment is not found in enough quantity
to validate establishing a new tradition, however, as before,
no correlation with other areas could be found for this
sherd.
Williams Site (Cu-6)
The Williams site was surveyed on April 8, 1941 and no
excavation was undertaken. All the data below is on the
basis of surface survey material. The site is located in the
Stafford area also.
A good supply of flint items was discovered, considering
the fact that all the finds were on the surface and no test
pits were dug.

Archeo~ogical Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

181

Chipped Stone Objects
Various types of knives, drills, projectile points and scrapers appear in the Williams material. Some of these have
been fashioned from Kay County flint.
Five types of scrapers appeared on the surface. Six snubnosed scrapers of the concave flake variety were found.
Fifteen side-scrapers are included in both the straight and
curved types. Three pointed scrapers were picked up and
a new type, for this area, was found. This is an oval shaped
or round scraper, being chipped on both sides with secondary
chipping around the perimeter on both surfaces of the item.
There are three types of knives located on the Williams
site. One appeared to be a fragment of an elongated, diamond shape type with alternately beveled edges. Two are
of the flake variety explained in the McLaughlin I report.
Also a third type is represented by three pieces, being made
from a refractured flint spall, similar to those found in
Shahan I. All of these pieces are about three inches in
length.
A wide variety of projectile points ranging from threefourths inch to three inches in. length were found on the
Williams farm.
The triangular type accounts for six points. Three points
are basically triangular with two side notches and a basal
notch. There are six points of the triangular type with only
two side notches. Five points fall into the triangular pattern class but they have concave basal edges. All the
above mentioned arrowheads do not exceed one and one
half inches in length.
A long slender drill was found without shoulders. The
drill is only three fourths inch in length and is manufactured to a high degree of efficiency. Upon first seeing this
artifact, it was mistaken for a point due to its fragmentary
condition.
Two oval shaped drills were found that were made from
Kay County flint and these are chipped on both sides. They

182

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

are both more than two inches in length. Another peculiar
fragment was found, two inches in length. This has a side
projection and is ovoid in cross section. It is finely chipped
and may have been used as a knife but its exact use is
unknown.
In addition to these flint items, a 44 cal. brass cartridge
was found in the area. This was the first time a contact
item was discovered in relation to any of these sites and
as all of the items of the Williams site occur on the surface,
it is probably not associated with the flint material.
Gound Stone Objects

One rectangular mano, made of red sandstone, was picked
up with two other mano fragments on the surface. Five
pieces of sandstone have been used as abraders, one arrow
shaft smoother, three awl sharpeners and one flat abrader.
Hammerst0nes are included and two round igneous rock
examples, three inches in diameter, with flattened sides,
were picked up.
A stone pipe fragment was picked up which was too
small to give evidence of shape.
Pottery
Pottery for the survey is represented by one hundred and
forty sherds, all of which are surface finds.
Smooth caliche or caliche and grit ware occurs with the
temper being finely ground or as heavy, thick particles ranging up to six ram. in width. The same range for tempering
is found for the cordmarked caliche or caliche and grit
wares. In the caliche, grit and sand tempering, all the particles seem to be finely ground. The two grit sherds are of
a coarse tempered variety and the shell tempering is finely
ground.
Surface finish in the series is rather widely exemplified.
About one-half of the sherds are smooth in finish. A greater
percentage of the sample is cordmarked than in any of the
previous sites, including sixty-seven sherds. One punc-

Archeotogical Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

183

tate,caliche sherd was found, which is unique for the site.
Both Sta]ford Plain and Sta]ford Cordmarked are found in
abundance on the site and both are represented in all the
temper categories. There is no cordmarked caliche, grit and
shell or no smooth grit tempering in the site.
The vessels must have had a rounded appearance as the
body sherds were concave. There are one hundred and sixteen of these. Twenty-one rim sherds were picked up and
are of the flat edged, flared rim, non-decorated variety.
Two lugs of the strap variety occur as well as one base
sherd. The latter is circular and flat bottomed in appearance.
Two worked body sherds have been rounded on the edges
and are possibly game counters.
Shahan II Site (Cu-7)
The Shahan II site is located on the Shahan farm and is
cut through the center by U. S. Highway 66 and the Rock
Island railroad at a wide bend of Turkey Creek. tt is about
four miles south of the Goodman I and II sites. The survey
of this area was conducted April 7, 1941.
At least eight test pits were excavated but only pits No.
4, 5, 6 and 8 yielded any material. Three ten foot squares
were excavated and square 3:1 produced a cache pit. No
houses were indicated by either survey or excavation.
The cache pit is not included in the Field Supervisor’s
report and its dimensions are not available for study. It
yielded a bison scapula hoe and a bone digging stick point.
Chipped Stone Objects
There was a relatively large sample of flint objects
picked up in this area and the Chipped Stone series for
Shahan II includes a small amount of both Kay County and
Amarillo flint items. A large sample of knives, projectile
points, drills and scrapers with many discarded flakes and
unworked spalls indicate a great amount of industry in the
surveyed area and the possibility of a workshop.

184

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Three snub-nosed scrapers were found, similar to those
mentioned in the previous sites. Eleven side-scrapers were
found in the area. The largest number of scrapers of one
type represented is the end-scraper. Ten of these are included. Two examples of pointed scrapers were recovered.
All the above mentioned varieties are seemingly manufactured by methods explained in relation to other sites in the
immediate vicinity, so it will not be necessary to repeat
them.
Knives included are of the rounded end, concave flake type
earlier mentioned and the reflaked spall variety. There are
three of the former and four of the latter patterns found.
In addition to these, there is a third S-shaped knife variety,
which is flaked on both sides with secondary flaking along
the edges. It is only about two inches in length.
Projectile points are of five types. Five specimens of the
triangular point were found. Some of these had been manufactured from flakes and are chipped only on one side. One
other basically triangular point was found, with a concave
base and an elongated body. This example is chipped on
both sides. Two points are triangular with two side notches
and one basal notch. Also a type is present having only the
two side notches. All these points are less than one inch
in length.
Another fragment was found, which is oval in cross section and elongated with parallel sides but fractured at both
ends. This item may or may not have been used as a projectile point or knife.
One flint drill was obtained in the Shahan II ~rea, which
is exceedingly well manufactured with a wide, curved, flat
base and a long shank that widens toward the point and is
diamond shaped when viewed from the point end. The
drill is two inches in overall length.
Ground Stone Objects
Three sandstone abraders of conical shape were picked
up. They were probably used as awl smoothers since their
grooves are angular in cross-section.

Archeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

185

Bone Objects
A bison scapula was found in the cache pit mentioned
earlier.

It is fragmentary but shows evidence of abrasion,

not only on the blade but the butt as well.

This suggests

that the implement may have been used in the hand rather
than being mounted. A portion of a bone digging stick point
was picked up, having abrasive marks on its point.
A peculiar bison rib specimen was found with three cross
striations at one end, occurring at regular intervals.

This

item, which may have been a portion of a musical rasp, was
found only in part as the entire cross section of the rib is
not available.
Pottery
Pottery on the Shahan II site numbered one hundred
and twenty-one sherds.
In all these samples, smooth or cordmarked smooth caliche
or caliche and grit tempered sherds have coarsely ground
temper with most of the particles being four ram. in cross
section. The caliche, grit and shell seems to be more finely
ground and the three grit sherds are of medium coarseness.
The shell temper is also finely ground.
The smooth sherds are representative of the larger portion of this series with eighty-nine sherds falling into this
category.

Thirty cordmarked smoothed examples occur on

the site and only two noduled pieces were picked up.
No restorable pots were found but from the appearance
of the one hundred and five body sherds, the vessels were
round: The rim sherds (twelVe) are the flared rim type
.as in the Williams series of pottery.

Three strap lug handle

fragments occur, which have nodes attached along the outer
edges.
base.

The one base sherd available is circular with a flat

186

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Stafford Plain and Stafford Cordmarked are in evidence
with the same temper types discussed in the Williams site.
The noduled pieces are possibly indicative of trade with
the Washita River Focus since they are strikingly similar
to the type found there.
Associated Animal Remains
On all the six sites mentioned in this report, there is evidence of buffalo, deer and rodent bones.

They are all frag-

mentary and some of them have been worked into bone implements.

Some unworked clam shell fragments are also

found.
CONCLUSION
It is my conclusion from overall familiarity with these
materials that temper is not significant in the area since
both Stafford Plain and Stafford Cordmarked traditions
are dominant, and any of the temper variants do not differ
significantly from these traditions .except for temper consistency.

Consequently, it may be concluded that temper

was not a determining factor in this region and that both
these traditions include pottery with a wide temper variation
which does not alter their general appearance.
The dating for these sites has not been definitely established. The entire group probably followed a dual subsistence pattern since both implements of agriculture and
various types of animal bones are present. No direct connection with historical groupings can be definitely stated.
Evidence that any of the groups had yet obtained the horse
is lacking and the only possible contact item was the mentioned .44 calibre cartridge case.
These sites are probably more closely related to those of
the lower Washita River region, which has been exemplified by the Lee Site, than any other groups of prehistoric
Oklahoma.

Archeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

187

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Schmitt, Karl,
"The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma,"
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 21, Lubbock, Texas, 1950.
Watson. Virginia
"The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis," The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 21, Lubbock, Texas, 1950.

THE GOODMAN I SITE
CUSTER COUNTY, OKLAHOMA*
BY

A~w

GALLAHER

The Goodman I site was reported to the Department of
Anthropology of the University of Oklahoma in the latter
part of January, 1941, by Mr. Boone Goodman on whose
farm the site is located. Mr. Goodman first noticed the site
when he discovered a large piece of wattle which had been
exposed on the surface as the result of plowing. He immediately recognized the importance of the find, and is to
be commended for his prompt report to proper authorities.
Excavation was begun on February 10, 1941, under the
general direction of Dr. Forrest E. Clements, with Lynn
Howard acting as supervisor. W.P.A. labor was employed.
Thanks are due to Professor J. Willis Stovall, Director of
the Museum, for identification of the animal bones; to Professor C. A. Merrit, Department of Geology, for identification of caliche used in tempering pottery; to Professor
Karl Schmitt, Department of Anthropology, for helpful
hints on correlative material; and especially to Professor
R. E. Bell, Chairman of the Department of Anthropology, for
ideas on organization of material, and for editing the manuscript.
The site is located on the first terrace of the west bank
of the Washita River in Custer County, Oklahoma, one-half
mile west and one-quarter mile south of the town of Stafford. It was surveyed and laid off in a north-south and
east-west direction at intervals of ten feet, the lines being
numbered, beginning with 1, etc. The lanes formed by eastwest lines were known as rows whereas the lanes formed
by north-south lines were called alleys, with the stake in the
lower right-hand corner used as the designating marker for
each square. Three primary areas were excavated, these
being designated on the map as Excavation 1, House 1 and
sMateria]s available to the author were a quarterly rel~ort written by ~ioward~
~ sketches of houses, several photographs of the excavation, and the excavated
tvnatorlal. Field notes were missing, and a trip to the area revealed little because
excavation had been filled in and replanted with grass.

The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma

18i

¯

17

|o

Center

Posts

16

15
|45
SCALE

O,

;_

’
~

144

145

~ I0 Fro
FIGURE S

Upper~ Ma~ of Oklahoma showing location of Goodman
Lower: House No. 1, Goodman I site.

’~46

189

190

Texas A~cheologicaI and paleontological Society

House 2, and in addition, test pits of variable depths were
sunk at random over an area approximately one hundred
and fifty yards square. Excavation was by four inch levels,
with six levels (or twenty-four inches) being the deepest
excavation point. A more detailed summary of the excavated area is given in Figure 9.
FEATURES
Houses
Concentrations of grooved wattle suggest the possibility of
two houses at this site. Several post holes were discovered,
but no complete patterns noted.
The mass of wattle unearthed at House No. 1 indicates
the structure to have been about twenty-four feet square.
An enlarged plan is given in Figure 8. Four center post
holes are arranged in an approximate square pattern in
the central part of the house; a fire pit is centrally located
between these four posts. Seven post holes are on the
periphery of the wattle concentration, and in the northwest
corner of the house there is an eight foot square offset, rising approximately ten inches above the floor level and
forming sort of a platform.
House No. 2, a.little to the north, and some one hundred
feet to the east of house No. 1, appears to be about sixteen
feet by twenty feet. A fire pit is found in ~he center of the
house, and there is a single post hole to the north and
south, each equidistant from the fire pit. Location is given
on Figure 9.
From available information indications are that irregularly shaped houses of wattle and daub construction were
the customary dwelling units. Apparently center poles were
utilized for support, and there is a strong possibility that
smaller poles were placed around the outer edge of the house.
A fire pit was located between the central pole supports.
Cache Pits
Three shallow pits are found in the vicinity of House No.
1 all of which are so small and sha!low that the investigator

The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma

191

doubts their use as cache pits. These small pits are designated P1, P2, and P3 on Figure 9. P1 is one foot and ten
inches in diameter, and one foot three inches deep; P2 is
three feet three inches in diameter, and one foot four inches
deep; P3 is three feet nine inches in diameter, and only five
inches deep. No information is available on the content of
these three pits.
Four cache pits are found in the Excavation 1 Area, and
with the exception of cache No. 1 they are fairly well documented. They are designated as C1, C2, C3, and C4 on
Figure 9. No information is available on C1. C2 is four
feet four inches in diameter, and four feet three inches
deep, and contained several animal bones, including a fragment of a scapula hoe and a piece of worked bone (presumably a flesher). In addition, one bone bead, two mussel
shells, a small metate, twenty pottery sherds, and a small,
retouched, flake knife were found in this cache. C3 is fivefeet and three inches in diameter, and four feet and ten
inches deep, and revealed four shell fragments, some animal bones, a flint scraper, and an undetermined number
of pottery sherds. C4 is three feet and three inches deep,
and is somewhat bell shaped, with a top diameter of four
feet, and a bottom diameter of four feet and five inches. In
it was found two pottery sherds, one small mussel shell,
and several animal bones.
The cache pits at this site range from around three to five
feet in depth, and from four to five feet in diameter.
In
view of the contents it is possible that the pits could have
been used part of the year for food storage, and upon removing the food they were then filled with refuse.
Fire Pits
One fire pit was found in Excavation 1 Area, and is designated on Figure 9. This well defined feature was found at
a depth of two feet and seven inches below the surface.
The pit was circular, with straight sides and concave base,
and contained a few artifacts which were found scattered
among a large amount of ash and burnt rock. These consist

192

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of four fragments of charred bone awl, a beveled, diamond
shaped knife, a small piano-convex scraper, fragments of
another, two pottery sherds, animal bones, shell fragments,
and a large lump of charcoal. A few pieces of wattle ~vere
found nearby, although no house is reported near the fire
pit.
There is
House No.
formation
House No.

a fire pit in each of the two houses. The pit in
1 is eighteen inches in diameter, but all other
is lacking on it, as well as on the fire pit in
2.
Bu~a~

In the early part of January, 1951, Mr. E. A. Auxier,
present occupant of the Goodman farm, reported to the
University Museum that while in the process of digging a
storm cellar he had uncovered two burials, located approximately one hundred and fifty yards from the original excavation site. He kindly donated the material to the Museum,
whereupon January 16, 1951, Dr. Bell and Dr. Schmitt of
the Anthropology Department investigated the burial site.
Burial 1, an adult male, represents a flexed burial found
in a pit about three feet and ten inches deep, and about two
feet and six inches in diameter, with the skull to the east
and legs to the west. The body appeared to have been dropped into the pit with the legs extended "up into the air."
Associations were a small stone elbow pipe, a clam shell,
and several broken stones, including a mano fragment.
Burial 2, also an adult male, was found in a pit about
four feet and ten inches deep, and approximately three feet
in diameter, and as in Burial 1, the head was to the east.
The body was lying on its back, with legs folded and the
knees pointing south, and with the arms extended from the
elbow outward from the body with the hands "close
together." Two pottery vessels, both placed to the south
of the skeleton a few inches in front of the hands, were
found in an upright position. Twenty-nine small olivella
shell beads appeared under the chin, and a flint knife, lying
under the upper arm, presumably the left, was also found.

The Goodma~ I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma

193

Accompanying photographs of the two pots and the knife
are included.

(Plate 25, A.)

Presumably these two burials represent a part of the
cemetery associated with the nearby village.

The two pots

found with Burial 2 are of the same type pottery that was
excavated, and in view of the proximity of the graves to
the village area, this assumption seems justified.

The

graves were represented by circular or oval pits dug into the
earth.

The body was then placed into the pit in a flexed

position, usually with the head to the east. Both burials had
grave offerings in association.
CHIPPED STONE OBJECTS
Projectile Points
The collection of chipped stone objects from this site includes seven projectile points (Plate 24, D). Four of these
points are similar enough that they can be considered as

FIGUP~ 9

Area

of

excavations at Goodman I site, Custer county, Oklahoma.

194

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

representing the same type, whereas the remaining three
exhibit distinct individual differences.
The four similar points, one from a burial, and each of
the three others from a separate layer, are triangular in
shape, unnotched, with straight sides and base.

Three of

these points are fairly short and broad, while the fourth
is longer and more slender, with the range in length being
from three-fourths inch to one inch.

In all cases chipping

is on both faces.
There is one small point, approximately three-fourths
inch in length, exhibiting double notching on the sides.
The upper notch is about one-fourth inch down from the
base, and the second notch is about five-eights inch down
from the base, with the base itself being slightly concave.
Again, both faces have been chipped.
There is one barbed point present, one and three-fourths
inches long, with fairly uniform body width to about onehalf the length, where it curves to form the point. The
rounded, rather blunt barbs join the body approximately
one-third down from the top. The base rounds outward
from the barbs, with the basal line being slightly concave.
The last point is approximately seven-eighths inch in
length, roughly triangular in shape, slightly concave sides,
and with a definitely convex base. Each side projects slightly beyond the base, these pointed projections sloping into
the convex basal line..
Without exception the projectile points have been chipped on both faces. The original fracture surface is seldom
present, chipping in all cases having been quite extensive,
and particularly skillful on the edges. Flint’ is the material
utilized in manufacture of projectile points, and with the
exception of the white barbed point, color ranges from pink
to red.
1. Ellis, Holmes,
1938, vl~. 63-64.

"Correspondence,"

American

Antiquity,

VoL

IV.

No.

1,

PLATE 24
A Flint knife found with Burial 2: B, flint knives: C, scrapers: D, points: The
point third from left was found with Burial 1; E, bison scapula hoe; F, bone awl
G. bone flaker ; H, shaft smoother ; I, stone pipe roland with Burial 1 : J, bone bead
K. digging stick points. Reduced to 2/5 actual size.

The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma

19"/

Knives
This site produced four knives, each of which is different.
The types represented are two triangular varieties, a four
bladed implement, and a flake example.
The flake knife was found in cache 2, and represents a long
narrow flake, thin in cross section, with rechipping all along
one edge. The material is a multi-colored flint.
The four bladed knife is roughly diamond-shaped, and is
of the alternate bevel type, Plate 24, B. It is tong, rather
narrow, and fairly thin in cross section, and is manufactured
from a dark gray flint banded with red to light gray.
The triangular knife has been worked on all three edges,
Plate 24 B. The base is straight, sides are convex, tapering
to a point, and the cross section reveals a compressed oval
outline. The edges have been finely chipped, with the
entire blade representing secondary chipping. The material
is a grayish brown flint.
The fourth knife, a very unusual type, was found in
Burial 2. At the longest point this knife is about six and
three-fourths inches, and is characterized by a relatively
pointed spur, three and one-half inches in height from base
to point, which leans to one side. The accompanying photograph will better illustrate this unusual artifact, (Plate
24, A).
Scrapers
This site yielded twenty scrapers, eleven of which can be
classified as end scrapers, and nine of which can be called
side scrapers. Both types of scrapers were found in all
levels of the site, indicating homogenity for the habitation
period.
The end scrapers are predominantly piano-convex, ranging in size from seven-eighths inch to one and five-eighths
inches. The ventral surfaces represent the unretouched
original flake surface, which is in most cases more or less
concave, two of the longer specimens evidencing pronounced
concavity. The shaping of the instrument has been attained

198

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

by removing flakes from the dorsal surface, and in most
instances the cutting end has been finely worked about the
edges. Approximately one-half the end scrapers have been
worked on three edges, whereas the remainder have been
worked primarily on the end. Two of these are roughly
triangular, the rest being more oval in outline. Four of
the specimens are quite thick at the scraping edge, while the
remainder have approximately equal thickness throughout,
tapering somewhat at the cutting edge. Three of the scrapers have a markedly flat dorsal surface, whereas two others
have a pronounced media! line, the latter two exhibiting
the best chipping along the cutting edges. All end scrapers
are made from variable colored flint, ranging from light
gray to dark red, with correspondingly mottled tints in
between.
There is a wide range of shapes and sizes found among the
side scrapers. Six of them are definitely triangular shape,
with the remaining five rather rectangular.
The triangular types all show chipping on two edges, there
being two specimens which have been chipped on three; one
of the latter, a broad thin flake, has very fine chipping on
the cutting edges. With one exception, all triangular scrapers show relatively thin cross sections. In only two cases is
there evidence of chipping on both faces, the chipping being
confined primarily to the edges.
The rectangular side scrapers are also variable. Three
exhibit chipping on two edges, while the remainder have
chipping on only one. One small speciman has chipping on
the dorsal and ventral faces, but the others show only the
original flaking scars. The material for the manufacture
of side scrapers is a variable colored flint, ranging from
light gray to dark gray, dark reds, and medium yellow tints.
Miscellaneous,

In addition to the above mentioned chipped stone items,
there were sixteen flint flakes. There were also three
quartzite flakes, any one of which could have been used for
a scraper. Two other pieces of flint exhibit sufficiently

The Goodman I Site, Cus~er County, Oklahoma’

199

sharp cutting edges to have been used as scrapers, although
they show no signs of having been reworked.

There are

two pieces of flint which exhibit evidence for having been
worked, but as to what category they would come under is
debatable.

Presumably they represent unfinished or dis-

carded material.
GROUND STONE OBJECTS

There are six manos or grinding stones, three of which
can definitely be placed in the same category, whereas the
other three are somewhat different.
Three of the stones are oval in shape, and of the three, one
in particular approaches a round cross section, whereas the
remaining two in cross section would represent more of a
compressed oval shape. Two of these stones have a relatively fiat side which represents the side exhibiting the most
wear, and the other stone appears to have been used equally
on both surfaces.
Another stone has been worn flat on two sides, leaving
two other sides somewhat round, and pitted as though the
instrument had been pecked into shape. Resting the stone
on one of the flat surfaces reveals somewhat of a rectangular
instrument, two of the sides slightly curved outward.
There is a long rectangular mano present, the approximate
dimensions of which are three and three-~ourths by two
and one-fourth by eight inches. The principal composition
is hematite, and the upper surface exhibits a concave curvature which appears to have been chipped and pitted, hence
there may have been some use of the hematite as pigment.
The lower surface and side surfaces are relatively flat,
although they are not too smooth.
The last stone has been broken, but in its original state
must have been an oval mano. Cross section reveals a
rectangular artifact. The upper and lower sides apparently
were both used, although one shows considerably more

200

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

wear than does the other.
is worn fairly smooth.

The rounded portion of the stone

Metates
There are fargments of four metates. Two of these have
been fashioned from a fine reddish colored sandstone material, while the other two are of a medium grained, reddish
colored granite. All show wear on only one surface, and
indications are that grinding was by a rotary motion.
The two granite pieces are not from the same artifact,
one being a little coarser than the other, and of a slightly
darker color. The larger piece shows a good portion of the
rim area, and exhibits evidence of burning along the rim
edge, and along one side of the fracture. The small piece
is from the interior portion of the basin.
The two sandstone pieces are of different composition, one
being much darker colored, and of a somewhat finer grain
than the other. The dark stone, about two inches square
by one inch thick, represents only a small portion of the
original stone. The larger stone, which is roughly rectangular in shape, is about seven and one-half by eight by one
inches. It has been centrally worn, causing a depression in
the center, leaving the two sides somewhat higher. Both
of these artifacts are very smooth.
Abraiding Stones
There are several pieces of sandstone present, but there is
only one which is definitely grooved as the result of use,
Plate 24, H. This grooved stone has been broken, but there
are a number of grooves of varying depth which at one time
probably sufficed as an arrow shaft smoother. A couple
of smaller stones show signs of having been worn smooth,
but the function of these stones is in doubt.
Ceremonial Objects of Stone
The one elbow pipe found with Burial 1 is the single pipe
represented in this site, (Plate 24, I). This small pipe is
made from a yellow colored, fine grain stone. The slightly

The Goodman I Si$e, Custer County,:Ok~ahoma

201

bulging bowl meets the stem at an approximate right angle,
both the~stem and bowl being approximately one inch in
length. The accompanying photograph illustrates the features of this artifact.
BONE OBJECTS
Hoes
One fairly complete bison scapula hoe and the fragments
of two_others were unearthed at this site, (Plate 24, E). All
exhibit some modifications of the bone as a result of the
manufacturing process. The suprascapular border has been
beveled to insure sharpness to the blade, and a rather high
degree of polish, as a result of use, is present of the flat
portion of the blade.
The one speciman which is primarily intact appears to be
well worn. Apparently the hoe was sharpened as it became dulled, and there obviously was no attempt to trim
the blade to remove irregularities. Possibly the tool was
employed in the hand, there being no visible evidence of
halting.
The ~remaining two implements are represented by fragments and show nothing unusual. One is a portion of the
suprascapular fossa, whereas the other two fragments are
from the anterior ridge of the scapula. All fragments have
a high polish, and all have been subjected to fire.
Digging Stick Points
There are two digging stick points present, both manu~factured fron~l bison tibia. The two fragments are each about
two inches in length, both exhibit use polish, and both have
been subjected to fire. The cutting edge on the upper side
has been beveled to give somewhat of a wedge appearance.
Fteshers
There is one flesher, about five and one-half inches in
length, that has been fashioned from the anterior ridge of
bison scapula. The flesher evidences a good use polish on

Texas Archeologica~ a~d Paleontological Soc~et~

only one surface.

The instrument has been broken diagon-

ally across one end, giving the appearance of a knife blade.
Awls
There are pieces of two awls present, one of which is one
inch in length, the other approximately three and one-half
inches. The two instruments, both of which have been subjected to fire, presumably have been manufactured from
fish spine, Plate 24, F.

Cross section of the upper extremity

reveals somewhat of a rectangular shape, with the implement tapering to a round cros~ section as it approaches the
working end. The points are missing from both awls. The
entire surface of the awls shows polish as the result of use.
Flakers
One flaker was found. It consists of the main portion of
the original, and is about three and one-fourth inches in
length. Manufacture was from the sternal rib of a deer.
The flaking end has been beveled to a point, the latter being evidenced on the flat surface of the rib, Plate 24, G.
Beads
There are two beads present, both manufactured from bird
bone. One has been finished and polished, whereas the
other has never been completely worked.
The finished bead is one and one-fourth inches in length,
and one-fourth inch in diameter, with rounded ends and
polished body, Plate 24, J. The other bead is about threefourths inch in length, and less than one-fourth inch in
diameter. It exhibits some polish, but the ends haven’t been
worked as have those on the finished ornament.
Miscellaneous

There is the distal end of a deer cannon bone which shows
some evidence of having been worked. There are shallow
p~_rallel striations which have been cut into the bone, extending in horizontal direction on two sides of the shaft
just below the condyles. There are also several pieces of

The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma"

203

bone which exhibit use polish, but these are of such proportions that the original implement cannot be determined.
Shell
There was considerable shell present, but none that
has been worked. However, many of the pieces would have
been suitable for spoons, scrapers or other purposes. There
were also several olivella shell beads found with Burial 2.
Clay
There are three small balls of clay. One of these is a
globular ball about one inch in diameter; another is somewhat oval in cross section; and the third, which has been
burned, is fairly rough in appearance.
There is a small conical piece of clay which obviously is
from a small figurine. It is about one inch in length, tapering to a point at the top, and has an irregular base of about
three-eighths inch in diameter. Presumably it is the bottom of a figurine.
Several pieces of baked clay wattle were found, these
being pure clay with no tempering material present, although
a few pieces exhibit irregular markings on the outer surface. In addition, an irregular piece of pinkish-red clay
has been drilled through the center. This object is rough
and pitted, and evidences no discernable shape.
Pottery
A total of four hundred and seventy-four sherds were
found, one hundred and ten of which are from the surface,
and the remaining three hundred and sixty-four from the
excavation. There are two main types represented which
will be designated as Stafford Plain and Stafford Cordmarked. In both types the tempering material is predominantly caliche,2 the latter being frequently combined with
grit, sand, limestone, clay, or shell. Of the excavated sherds,
two hundred and seventy-two are plain and ninety-two
2.

Definitely CaCo2.

There is an abundance of caliche in this par~eular rea’ior~,

and limestone deposits being unknown, it is assumed that this material is callche.

204

Texa~ Archeo~logicaI and Paleontological Society

are cordmarked. Test pits~ revealed forty-two plain sherds
and four cordmarked. Cache pit No. 2 yielded twenty-one
plain sherds; cache pit No. 3 contained three plain sherds
and four cordmarked; and cache pit No. 4 had within it two
plain sherds. Both the StaJford Plain and Sta]ford Cordmarked are characterized by an excessive amount of caliche
tempering material, although there is a single sherd exhibiting bone temper, and a few having only clay or sand. A
more detailed classification of tempering and surface finish
is given in Table No. 1. No basic differences in distribution of either type could .be noted in any of the six excavated
levels.
Table No~ l--Temper & Sur]ace Finish

Caliche .................................. ~0
Caliche & Clay .............. 22
Caliche & Shell ............ 39
Caliche & Limestone .......... 8
Caliche & Hematite ........... 2
16
Caliche & Sand
Caliche & Grit ...................... 67
Caliche, Grit & Sand ........... 17
Caliche, Grit & Clay ............ 5
Caliche, Grit & Hematite .... 7
Caliche, Ls & Hematite ...... 3
Clay ..................................... 16
Sand ......................................... 9
Bone __: .....................................
Grit, Clay & Sand
TOTALS

__271

1
1

1

43
4
3
4
2
15

1
2

3

1

81

107
26
44
13
4
34
67
20
7
7
3
17
13
1
1
364

The above table is by no means completely accurate.
However, it gives a general idea of the pottery which was
excavated at this site, and of the use of caliche as a temperingmaterial. In many instances it was difficult to deter-

PLATE 25
two potter~- vessels found with l~uria! 2 ; B, pot sher~L~ from Goodman 1 site.
Redaced to 2/5 actual size.

The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma

207

mine which tempering classification a sherd should come
under, and in all such cases the-author used the dominant
tempering material to make the separation.
STAFFORD PLAIN
Paste:
Method of manufacture:. Large coils, poorly welded together.
Temper: Most common single element is caliche: most
. popular combinations are caliche and grit, caliche and
shell, or caliche, sand and grit. Other tempering materials- utilized were clay, limestone, and hematite~ In
most cases the secondary tempering materials were combined with caliche. Amount varies from a small quantity to an excessive amount, with the consistency varying from finely ground particles to coarse particles,
both of which are visible to the naked eye.
Texture: Cros~ section appearance is fine to medium
coarse. Usually quite compact, although those sherds
tempered with clay appear quite porous. Sand tempering material feels rough to the touch.
Hardness: 1.5 to 4.0, with 3.0 the most common.
Color: Core ranges from light gray to black, with tans
and reds. Outer surfaces range from light to dark gray,
and from tan to reddish brown, the latter being most
prominent. Many sherds appear to have been overfired.
SURFACE FINISH: Poorly smoothed exteriors and interiors with frequent, indications of brush mark striations.
Both exteriors and interiors evidence pits resulting from
leaching out of the caliche temper. Many sherds have
large caliche particles visible on the surface.
DECORATION: One sherd has a curved applica strip rising about 1/16 inch above the surface. Two rim sherds
show paired projections above the rim contour. The

Texas Archeological and paleontological Society

208

projections are rounded and of the same thickness as
the lip. These projections lie immediateiy where the
strap joins the body and rim. One disc-like object has
several holes drilled in it.
FoTT~:

Rim: Slants outward usually. Some cases of almost vertical rims, and one which appears to slant inward very
slightly.
Lip: Most commonly narrowed or rounded.
Body: Variable size jars, with expanded bodies. Strap
handles are present on outward flaring rim forms, being
anchored across the juncture of the body and rim.
Base: Both round and fiat are represented.
Thickness: Lip from 1/16 to 3/16 inch; rim and body sherds
from 1/16 to 3/8 inch, with the average around 1/4 inch.
PROBABLE RELATIONSHIPS: On the surface several
sherds resemble Nocona Plain, and several resemble
Lindsay Plain3. However, the caliche tempering material isolates Stafford Plain as a local variant, although
it is reasonably certain that it is related to both of the
above types.
STAFFORD CORDMARKED
Paste:
Method of manufacture: Fairly large coils, poorly welded
together.
Temper: Most common is caliche, or a combination of
caliche and sand. Shell, limestone, clay, hematite and
bone were also used. These were in most cases combined with caliche. The amount varies from a small
quantity to an excessive amount. In some cases the
caliche is readily visible on the surface to the naked
eye.
3. Karl Schmit~, "The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma,"
Arclmeologlc~l and Pgleontelo~lcal Society, ¥o! 21, September, 1950.

Texas

The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma’

209

Texture: Cross section appearance is medium coarse to
coarse, with the caliche frequently having a sugary appearance.

Sand tempering material appears fairly fine.

Hardness: 1.5 to 3.5, with 2.5 the most common.
Color: A!most always a medium gray to black core.

Sur-

face varies from tan to black, with dark gray predominating.

Evidences of fire blackening on some sherds.

SURFACE FI~IISH: Exterior is cordmarked, and in all but
three sherds smoothing has occured after cordmarking.
In several instances polishing has occurred after cordmarking and smoothing. Cordma~kings are perpendicular to the rim in all but one sherd. Interiors are imperfectly smoothed; a few are grass wiped. Many interiors are quite porous, and several exteriors exhibit
leaching depressions caused by leaching out of the
caliche temper. Rim lips are generally smooth, although a few have been cordmarked.
DECORATION: None.
FORM:
Rim: In most cases vertical. A few rims have a very
slight outward flare of the upper 1/16 inch. One sherd
has a hole drilled approximately one inch below the lip
edge.
Lip: Commonly flattened or rounded, with occasional
thinning.
Body: Vessel shapes not completely known.
Base: Unknown.
Thickness: Lip from 1/16 to 5/8 inch; body sherds from
1/4 to 3/8 inch, with the majority around 3/8 inch.
PROBABLE RELATIONSHIPS: Except for the caliche
tempering material Stafford Cordmarked closely resembles that found along the Washita River in Garvin,

210

Texas Archeologic~il and Paleontological Society

County, Oklahoma4, and also Stamper Cordmarked~.
It most nearly resembles the Washita River pottery in
that it is very thick and heavy. A few of the sherds
resemble some of the cordmarked-smoothed sherds of
the Antelope Creek focus,, but the latter are-harder,
thinner, with much finer cord impressions. ~ The Stafford pottery evidently is related to both the Antelope
Creek and Washita River materials, the.primary difference being in the adaptation of caliche as a tempering
material.
POSSIBLE RELATIONSHIPS
Geographically the Goodman I site is located approximately midway between the Lee site of Garvin County,
Oklahoma, and the Optima site of Texas County, .Oklahoma. This is illustrated by the map on Figure 8. To
facilitate comparison between these three sites, the following Comparatige Trait List has been evaluated, patterned
after the one used by Watson in the description of the
Optima Focus.
COMPARATIVE TRAIT LIST~
TRAIT
Goodman
ECONOMY
Maize agriculture ............................-Hunting-gathering ............................ X
Evidence of fish use ........................ X
VILLAGES
Present .................................................. X
Defensive positions ........................ -Small number of houses .................... X
Located on stream terraces .............. X
HOUSES
Rectangular to square ....... :................ ?
Four central support posts ............X

SITE
Optima
X
X
--

Lee
?
X
X

X
X.

X
--

X

X

X

X

X
X

?
?

~. Vfrgfnla Watson, "The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect,"
A~rchmeologieal and Paleontological Society, VoL 21, September, 1950.

Texas

The Goodman l Site, Custer County, Oklahoma

211

Goodman Optima
Entryway lateral ................................ ?
X
Plastered floor .................................... ?
X
Central fire pit .................................... X
X
Roof low dome-shaped ...................... ?
X
Walls of poles ........................................ ?
X
Poles covered with clay .................... ?
X
Single row base slabs .........................
X
Base of solid adobe or adobe
b~icks .............................................. -X
Small adjoining rooms ....................-X
Single unit dwellings .......................... ?
X
*X=present; --=-absent; ?~incomplete evidence.
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS
Bison scapula hoe ................................ X
X
Bison metapodial digging stick
X
points ...................................................... -Bison tibia digging stick points .... X
X
Bison skull hoe ..................................
FOOD STOARGE
Bell shaped cache pits .................... X
Cists in floor ........................................ ?
Cists outside houses .......................... X
FOOD PREPARATION
Metates ............................................... X
Manos ...................................................... X
Hammerstones .................................... -Pottery ................................................ X
Aplasfic grit ................................... X
Aplastic caliche ................................ X
Aplastic limestone .......................... X
Aplastic bone .................................... X
Aplastic shell .................................... X
Aplastic clay ....................................... X
Soot blackening .............................. X
Globular ............................................X
Round bottomed ............................... X
Flat bottomed .................................... X

X
-X
X

--

X

X

~

X

~

X
X
X
X
X
--X
--X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
-X
X
X
-X
X
--

~

X

212

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Goodman
Straight rim, verticle or flaring _X
Strap handles present

Optima
X

_..X

Lee
X

--

X

Exteriors cordmarked ..................... X

X

X

Exteriors plain ..................................X

--

X

Thickened rim ............................... X
Incised notches on rim ................-Incised lines on lip
-Cordmarks on lip ...................._X
Circular punctates on rim and lip -Large blunt impressions on rim _--

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
------

X

X

X
X
X
X

X
-X
--

CUTTING, SCRAPING, SKIN PREPARATION
Knives ............................................X
Diamond shaped with alternate
bevel ......................................... X
Ovate ............................................-Triangular ....................................... X
Narrow curved ........................... X
Snub-nosed scrapers
(piano-convex) ................................ X
Side scrapers ...................................... X
Bone beamers ........................................X
Chisel-like bone tools ........................-SEWING, PUNCHING IMPLEMENTS
Flint drills with T-shaped head ....-Flint drills with unworked head ....-Flint drills with square head ........-Bone awls of metapodial, head
unworked .........................................-Bone awls of splinters ........................-Bone awls of bird bone ........................
Bone awls rectangular in cross
section ............................................... -Bone awls of fish spine .................... X
Bone awls of animal ribs ...............-Sandstone hones and awl
sharpeners ........................................ X

X

X

X
---

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
--

X
~
--

-X
X

X

X

The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma"

Goodman

Optima

213
Lee

WOVEN MATERIALS
Evidence of use ...........................X
Coiled basketry ................................-Yucca fibre
--

X
X
X

X

CHIPPING IMPLEMENTS
Bone, and (or) antler flaking tools
with rounded ends ......................X
X
Antler tapping tools with squared
ends ..............................................
X
Deer ulnae, Worked tip ......................

X

WEAPONS
Small, triangular, unnotched
projectile points, chipped on both
faces, bases straight to concave ..X
Small, triangular projectile points,
chipped on both faces, two side
notches, bases straight to
concave ............................................X
Small, triangular projectile
points chipped on both faces, two
side notches and- one base notch .... -Small, triangular projectile
points chipped on both faces,
two side notches (one nearest
the base considerably
smaller) and one base notch ..... :......-Larger, triangular, unnotched
projectile points ..................................-Larger dart points .............................-Shaft smoothers, sandstone ............... X
Shaft wrenches ................................--

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

CEREMONIAL OBJECTS
Stone elbow pipes ..............................X
Pottery pipes
Rasps, notched bison rib ................--

X

X
X

Texa~ :ArcHeo~ogical and~Paleontological Society

2i4’

Goodman

Optima

Lee

ORNAMENTS
Beads of bone ........................................X

--

Beads Of Olivella, with spire
rem6ved .............................................. X
Beads, disc, cut from mussel Shell .~.-Beads, cylindrical, cut from
mussel shell ....................................-Bone pendants .................................... m

X

X
X
X
X

Pendahts, musse! shell ......................--

X

Pendants, turquoise, microline .... --

X

BURIALS
Present ....................................................X

X

MISCELLANEOUS
Celts ...........................................-Pottery discs cut from sherds ...... ?
Hematite ................................... .’.......... .X

X
X
X

X

There is a total of 97 traits:
Goodman I site has 49, or 50.5% of the total.
Lee site has 56, or 57.7%.of the total.
Optima Focus has 79, or 81.4% of the total.
Of the 97 traits:
2, or 2.0% occur only in the Goodman I site.
6, or 6.1% occur only in the Lee site.
18, or 18.5% occur only in the Optima Focus.
Of the 97 traits:
26
10
9
12

are shared by Goodman, Lee and Optima.
are shared by Goodman and Lee, exclusive of Optima.
are shared by Goodman and Optima, exclusive of Lee:
are shared by Lee and Optima, exclusive of Goodman.

The traft list is not too informative for detailed rela~ionships, although it can be readily seen that a broad relation-

The, .Goodman I Si$e, Custer County, Ok~ahom~

ship between these ~ three sites exists.

215

On.the basis of pot,

tery comparison.s Goodman t is somewhat closer 40.Lee .~han
to Optima, but even in this respect, Goodman presumably.
would be in a different*foeus.

However, Some of’the more

important traits shared by Goodma.n I, and Lee which aren’t
found at Optima should be noted.

These are the presence

of bell shaped cache pits, shell and limestone pottery tera~
pers, presence of strap handles on pottery vessels, bone
beamers and b0~e beads. The general appearance of the
Pottery would also indicate that there is a closer relationship in this respect between Goodman I and Lee, than there
is between Goodman I and Optima.
At present the most important traits shared by Goodman
and Optima which aren’t found in the Lee site are houses
and burials. However, it is now known that further excavation in Garvin County will reveal both of these traits in
the vicinity of theLee excavation..It should also be noted
that there is quite a lot of difference in the houses found at
Optima and Goodman, and in ~his respect it is interesting
to note the different manner in which both groups utilized
caliche. The Optima peoples used caliche sl~bs in constructing their dwellings, while further to the south the
Goodman inhabitants used caliche as a tempering material
for pottery, and none whatsoever was found in either of the
two houses. This can probably be accbunted for by the
easy access to caliche in the panhandle area, whereas the
author wasn’t able to find any outstanding deposits near
the Goodman site, although various deposits are known
throughout Custer County.

CONCLUSION
Existing data are too incomplete to say definitely that
Goodman is more closely related to one of the above sites
than it is to the other, although it would appear that perhaps there is a slight inclination toward a closer affinity
with the Lee site. At any rate it appears fairly evident that
the three sites were culturally related, and existed contem-

Texas

Archeolog~ca~ and Paleontological ,.~ociety

poraneously sometime around 1300 to 1400, although it is
not possible to make a correlation with any historic tribe
at the present time. The evidence indicates the economy to
have been a combination hunting and agricultural type.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ellis, Holmes
"Correspondence," American Antiquity, Vol. IV, No. 1,
1938, pp. 63-64.
Schmitt, Karl
1950, "The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma,"
Vol. 21, Bulletin o] Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society (Lubbock, Texas).
Watson, Virginia
1950, "The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis," Vol. 21, Bulletin o5 Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society (Lubbock,
Texas).

SOME NEW ASPECTS OF THE TEPEXPAN
MAN CASE
B~ A. R. V. ARELLANO
With the appearance of criticisms on ttelmut de Terra’s
publications on Tepexpan Man by Black’ and Kriegerz, it
is felt that some of the ambiguities should be clarified, by the
addition of some previously unpublished information. In
this we have been aided by the personal services of Krieger
and Prof. Pablo Martinez Del Rio.
The Exhu~nation o] Tepexpan Man
The writer was in close communication with de Terra
during the latter’s work in Mexico, particularly during

Borrila¢o pa~Jocal
nizobl¢
/
5rn

0

/

/

/

/

A

FIGURE 10.
Plan

of Tepexpan-man

excavations.

Ruled

areas

are

undisturbed

blocks

within

excavation area. I. Original pit dug about Feb. 20, 1947. IL Enlargement of Feb.
’21, 1947. YII. Excavations of March-April, 1947, IV. Trench dug in January, 1950.
Zones of Barrilaco paed0cal (Caliche) development are separated by solid line within
pits where observed, and by dashed line where inferred,

Publisher by permission of the Director, Instituto Geologlco de Mexico.
American Antiquity, VoL 14 pp. 344-6, 1949. This criticizes de Terra’s article
in American Antlquit~G Vol. 13, pp. 40-4, 1947, chiefly from the standpoint of
excavation and recording technique.
2. American Antiquity, VoL 15, pD. 343-9, 1950. This deals with problems of
lake levels, geological interpretation, climatic inferences, etc. in Tepexpan Man, by
Tlelmut de Terra, Javier Romero, and T. Do Stewart (Viking Fund Publications
in Anthropology, :No. 11, 1949).
1.

218

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

January and February of 1947. He had ~considerable participation in the spade work concomitant with Segerstrom’s
topographic survey and Lundberg’s electrical survey. De
Terra generously offered to donateall fossil material that
he might find to the Instituto Geologico.
Thus, on February 21, 1947, de Terra b~ought to m:~ office
a long thin bone recovered from the central pit of the three
dug along the electrical anomalies. I thought it looked like
the broken epiphysis of an elephant vertebra and accompanied de Terra in the exhumation of what we thought was an
elephant. InOctober and December, 1946, I had found the
remains of two elephants in the Tepexpan vicinity, one of
which was associated with a worked obsidian Eake.3
Neither of us recognized the bone for what it was: part of
a human leg bone.
When we arrived at the site the next day, February 22,
as de Terra has explained, the laborers had removed the
deposits overlying the skull, but not the rest of the skeleton,
which was entirely in its matrix. It was noticed then that
the caliche zone (or paedocal) was not as conspicuous in
the walls as it was at the elephant sites previously excavated, but it was present.
When Javier Romero arrived we were ready to look for
the rest of the skeleton. De Terra allowed Romero and
myself to execute the manual phase.
He was present
throughout the operation and opined freely on how
it might best be accomplished. Being already familiar with
the local stratigraphy, I assumed most of the responsibility
for the exhumation.

3. ~he first was reported in El elefante fostl de Tepexpan y el hombre primitivo
(Revista Mexicans de Estudios Antropologicos Vol. 8, pu. 1-6, 1946).
Immediately
aft-st this was written, the author excavated a second skele~n, also ve~ nearly
~mplete, about 1 kin. west of the first one and in the same atrat~graphic Dositiom

Here again ~ve found one of the forelimbs complete, and fu~hermore a~iculat~
with its s~pu]~ Human inte~ention may be suspected from the fact t~t, of the
head elements, only a piece of tusk, the mandible, and hyoidal bon~ were ~ecovered ;
~d especially from the position and condition of the hyoldal bon~.
We sent

these ~re awl-like fo~ils ~ de Te~a in ~ew York, where he ob~ined identffi~tlon
by G. G. Simpson and ~ G. Chaff~ at the Ameri~n M~eum o£ ~atural Hist.. All
thee hyoIdal ~n~ had their ~ips b~ken and one of them w~ impinging on a s~
of several ve~ebrae.
A num~r of tips w~e also r~vered but no~ one ~uld ~

fit~ ~ the hyoidal el~en~. Apparently Te~expan Man or his con~m~
u~ ~e natural ~]s on the ~rc~, and While ~ doing b~ke their point, ~
which the damaged in~t~ment would be discarded.

Some New Aspects ol the Tepexpan Man Case

219

To retain as much evidence as possible, the north wall of
the pit, some 20 cm. at most from the skull, had been left
intact. Coordinates X, Y, and Z were obtained from a reference stake. Romero’s figure of 1.07 m. from the surface
to the skull is correct for the Z coordinate. The skull was
originally face downward. It was shifted to show the face
when pictures were taken. The mandible lay a few cms.
below, enclosed in a small lens of sand within the unmistakable buff silt characteristic of the upper weathered portion of the lacustrine facies of the Becerra formation. (This
terminology is discussed below).
We explored further southward from the skull and found
more bones. We decided to remove only the skull, and
left the site guarded overnight.
The following day, Feb. 23, we commenced to expose the
limb bones. The chief members were numbered and marked
with arrows indicating azimuthal direction and dip from the
horizontal (See Tepexpan Man, Pls. 32, B and 34, A). Again
we noted the matrix as being the buff silt that contained
the mandible, except that the deepest bones reached into an
olive gray silt4. We emphasized this because the proof of
association between the Tepexpan Man and the Becerra sediments lies in the undisturbed nature of this distinctive buff
clayey-silt quite as much as in the presumed presence of the
Barrilaco paedocal (caliche).
As has been stated, no pelvis, scapulae, or thorax appeared.
This absence has been variously explained5.
The Caliche Problem
The preliminary inspection seemed to show a caliche zone
in the north, west, and south walls in the immediate vicinity
of the skeleton; but in the east wall, about 1.5 m. from the
skull, it was absent. When we discussed the results of
Lundberg’s electrical survey, geophysicists Ricardo Monges
In Fig. 2, layers ~; and 6 are considered to re,)resent one continuous sedirnenprocess, the difference in color and texture being due to weathering of layer 5.
For the writer’s views see the magazine "Unlversidad de Mexico", September
wherein he l)ubltshed anonymously the article E! Hombre fosil de Tepexpan.

220

Texas ArcheoIog~cal and Paleontological SOciety

Lopez (then Director of the Instituto Geologico), and Alfonso de la O Carreno (Chief of the Geological Section of
the Secretaria de Recursos Hidraulicos) suggested investigating the possible relation between the absence of hard
lime crust and the electric anomalies. Accordingly, Ing. de
la O Carreno supplied resistivity equipment operated by a
competent technician, and Ing. Lopez directed me to make
borings in the immediate vicinity of the excavation. I was
assisted by Rafael Molina of the Instituto Geologico, who
also took a selection of samples. These samples have been
used to make dehydration curves for quick estimates of the
nature of the material; other analyses have been left pending.
The borings (Figure 12) prove that the zone of Barrilaco
paedocal (this is the proper name for the paedocal formed
on Becerra soils of a pedalfer and other more or less humid
types, corresponding to de Terra’s phase VII in Table !,
and layers 3 and 4 in P1. 3, A of Tepexpan Man) is also missing north of the long ditch in what seems like a wide reentrant which, however, does not seem to have any apparent relation to Lundberg’s equipotential lines.
The resistivity equipment was used to measure a profile
(seen in Figure 12) across the zone where the Barrilaco
paedocal disappeared and very clearly showed that where
the paedocal was missing the conductivity of the layers
within 1 to 3 m. from the surface increased.
An important feature is that every bit of soil from and
including the grass roots down to some 15 cm. above the
olive-gray silt fizzes vigorously with dilute hydrochloric
acid; whereas from that point down and into the olive-gray
silt the acid produces no reaction (Figure 11). This makes
it impossible to distinguish the Barrilaco paedocal on the
basis of lime content, so it must be identified through
characteristic texture. Fortunately this is simple (see Fig.
4 and P1. 3: A in Tepexpan Man) as the carbonate of. lime
deposited in the B-horizon of a soil profile produces textural patterns which mere consolidation cannot imitate
even though the degree of compaction and lime content be
the same in both zones. The origin of lime in layers 1 and

Some New Aspects o~ ~he Tepexpan Man Case

Reconstructed

Parma nest
Block

221

Reconstr uct,ed
~

I Archeologi
2~Totoltsing~
3

8arrilac

÷

,4.- Le~s of pumice grovel upto 2¢m, with buff Becerro for matrix.
5.oBecerro buffdoyey silt (weathered), "~
6.-Becerro olive groycloy~er silt I fresh )..[ Distinction col.~ed by weathering.
Intense llne above Borrilaco is paper thin film of llme with may be on evoporite
~’ Prickly grass (Zacahuixtls)

FIGURE 11
Gross-seotlonal reconstruction along line A-A’ of Fig. I.
The central block is that
shown in P1. 3, A of Tepexpan Man.
The hypothetical eastward projection of the
strata show how the Barrilaco paedocal merges laterally into a clayey silt similar
to underlying buff Becerra silt except for the darker color.

FIGURE 12
ElectrO.a! survey of Tepexpan site by Lundberg. February. 194V.
Lettered
.a~ e~ui~otentlals.
Bs~ed on heliograph furnished by de Terra on scale of
Adaptation and BarrHaco ~aedocat determinations by Arellano.

222

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

possibly 2 (Figure 11) can most probably be ascribed to
carbonate dust from the Lake Texcoco bed. In any dry
season large surfaces around its edges are exposed to wind
action.
In spite of abundant lime in the profile, no concentration
is going on at present. On the contrary, there is evidence
of leaching; hence the Barrilaco paedocal must have formed
during a drier and perhaps warmer period than the present. In the Mexico City basin (and perhaps in many other
valleys of central Mexico as well) this same paedocal everywhere overlies the elephant-and-horse extinct fauna. For
this reason it is correlated with the North American postglacial "Optimum" by Kirk Bryan6 (Altithermal period of
Antevs).
Plate 26, I, shows the east wall of the excavation on June
6, 1950, somewhat enlarged in respect to its position on February 23, 1947. The contrast between the zones of "Barrilaco paedocal diffused but recognizable" and "megascopic
Barrilaco paedocal destroyed" may be seen. This roughly
vertical contact does not continue down into the Becerra
buff silt, suggesting that it is not an erosional feature or an
excavation of some sort, but the limit of the more effective
leaching of the paedocal. The transitional nature of the 25
cm. of grayish silt overlying buff Beccera silt leads to the
conclusion that the grayish silt may be the leached equivalent of the partially leached Barrilaco in the block opposite
the skeleton, as we have indicated in Figure 11.
Lake Levels and Stratigraphic Relation Strips
According to de Terra, the E1 Risco III lake beach occurs
at 2240 to 2245 m. elevation and marks the end of Becerra
time. The top of the Tepexpan Man skull was at approxi-

6. Los suelos
omplejos y fosils de la altiplanicle de Mexico, en relaeton a los
¢ambios ellmatico~ (Boletin, Socledad Geologies Mexicana, Vol. xIn, pp. !-20, 1948.)
(Radiocarbon Dates as of September ~, 1950 Institute of ~Nt~clear Physics, University
of Chicago, 1950).
J. R. Arnold and W. F. Libby released a radiocarbon date on
plant matertml colIected by de Terra at a, depth of 1.22 to :1.78 m. in the Tepexpan
:Man site in January, 1950. The date of 41:18~-300 years is increadlble and we interpret this as due to contamination of ~-ome sort.
Chiefly. !~erhavs, the penetration
of small amount~ of Barrilaeo caliche down minute root holes.
De Terra (~.
in press, personal communication} explains this possible contamination as due
to later vegetation sending its rcots into the Becerra silt.

Some New Aspects o.! the Tepexpan Man Case

223

mately 2240.3 m. elevation. The lake must have stood at 2240
m., or lower, when the skeleton was deposited, and soon
thereafter risen at least to 2245 m., remaining there for the
2,000 years estimated by de Terra for the deposition of the
overlying silt.
There followed the Barrilaco dry period during which the
lake may have become completely dry. The heavy lime
coating on boulders under the ceramic site at Zacatenco
extends up to the 2248 m. lake level (the "Zacatenco beach"
in P1. 7 of Tepexpan Man). The lime may have formed
during the Barrilaco recession, rather than later as postulated by de Terra, in which case the E1 Risco III lake must
have reached an elevation of at least 2248 m. rather than
2245 m. The humic soils called Totolzingo evidence a moist
environment during which the lake reached an elevation of
2248 m., according to de Terra. In a moist environment
beach deposits do not usually accumulate lime in appreciable
quantity, and for this reason we consider the above-mentioned lime development at Zacatenco as of Barrilaco age.
At any .rate it would be desirable for de Terra to
reconsider the term "Zacatenco beach" for his 2248 m. lake
level. Zacatenco already has such wel!-established chronological status in ceramic stratigraphy that it should not be
applied to a lake level antedating the archaeological culture.
Stratigraphic Status o~ "El Risco" and "Older Becerra"
E1 Risco is a small andesitic knob about 10 km. northeast
of Mexico City, at .the foot of which are remnants of former
beaches elevated 2 or 3 m. above the plain. Thus de Terra
chose to name his shore deposits (beach sands, mudflats,
etc.) E1 Risco I, II, and III. It is a mistake, however, to apply
these labels to deeper water lake deposits. To name such
a deposit after a certain beach or lake level, is to imply a
distinction that experience has shown cannot be observed
in the field, since the entire Becerra lacustrine sediments,
2 to 3 m. in thickness, form a homogeneous mass (except for
alteration by weathering to buff or light brownish color,
usually developed on the top).

224

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

In 1945 I studied a beach-swamp deposit on the southern
outskirts of Mexico City and called it the Armenta Horizon.7 This is at ca. 2241 m. elevation and is overlain by 8
m. of Becerra fossil soil developed on an alluvial fan. A
radiocarbon date of about 11,000 to 16,000 years plus has
been determined by Libby and Arnold (see note 6) for the
Armenta Horizon. This horizon is probably the same as
E1 Risco III, as otherwise it would have to be older than E1
Risco I, a most unlikely alternative. Yet since Tepexpan
is 35 km. from the type locality of Armenta, retention of
"El Risco beaches" for the Tepexpan-E1 Risco area may be
desirable.
The term "Older Becerra" as used in Tepexpan Man requires revision since some of the material included (bed No.
3 and possibly 4, Fig. 8) is much older, possibly even Pliocene. In the Tepexpan area, however, the "Older Becerra"
is true Becerra alluvium which grades lakeward into the
lacustrine silt facies, and together with the narrow beach
deposits forms a rather complex intergradation. In general the Becerra formation bearing elephant and horse fossils is a compact unit which may go back to pre-Wisconsin
time. Any subdivision has only local significance.S
Institute de Geologico de Mexico
Mexico, D. F.
December 31, 1950
’L
A. R. ~P’. Arellano, Dates Geologicos sobre la Antiguedad de] Hombre en la
Cuen¢~ de Mexico (Segundo Congreso Sociedad Cienclas de Mexico, Vo]. 213-9, 1946.)
8.
A~ P~ V. Arellano, The Becerra, The Becerra Formation (Latest PIelstoeene) of
Central Mexico (XVIII International Gcologica! Congress, London, 1948).

PLATE 26 I
Tepexpan site on June 6, 1950, looking slightly north of east.
Spread tape
measures Irm
Burlap sack rests on natural surface; face below it (extreme right
in Fl. 3, A of Tepexpan Man) shows deep incision where paper-thin film of lime
Drotec~ the underlying stratum.
Farther down, the moisture limit is indicated by
darker color, below which is seen the lens of fine pumice grave].
The back (east)
mall was cleaned from b~y at left to man at right to show transition from "Barrilaco
paedocal diffused but recognizable" (lower two-thirds at ]eft) to zone of "Megascepic
Barrlelao destroyed" (lower half of tape). The upper stratum, archaeological and
historical, thickens toward the right, probably due to wind erosivn and later filling
the narrow dark zone between it and Barrilao may be Totolzingo.
PLATE 26, II

Rock and shell "beads" f~ora a gravel deposit in Bell County, Texas. The holes
in all were either entirely or ~)artlally drilled. See item in NEWS NOTES.

PLATE

26

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
THE 1950 ANNIIAL MEETING
The twenty-third annual meeting of the Society was held in
Canyon, Texas, on October 27-28, 1950. The program committee
deserves a r~und of applause for the excellent program and splen~did arrangements which it had prepared. The Panhandle-Plains
ttistorical Society sponsored a chuck wagon supper at Palo Dur~
Canyon on Friday evening for the attending members and guests.
Saturday’s program was a field trip to archaeoIogical sites on the
Canadian River. The following papers were presented:
¯ Dr. Karl Schn~dt, ’~urther Material fr~om the Washita Valley,
Oklahoma."
Dr. Robert E. Bell, "Field Work by the University of Oklahoma
During the Summer, 1950."
Dr. E. H. Sellards, "The Plainview Site."
Glenn L. Evans, "Recent Developments at the Clovis and Lubbock:
Sites."
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, "The Kent-Crane Site."
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, "Types of Clear Fork Points."
Dr. Erik Reed, "Pre-historical Chronology in the Southwest."
Rober~ L. Stephenson, "Smithsonian Institution’s Excavations at:
Whitney and Lavon Reservoirs."
Jane Holden, "Preliminary Report on the Bonnell Site."
Dr. Ernest Wallace, "Burial Customs of the Comanche Indians.’"
Fellows Sot the Society
The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society at its
annual meeting at Canyon, October 27, 1950, provided for the election of Fellows in the Society. The qualifications of Fellows and
the method ~f their election are as follows:
(1) The number of Fellows is never to exceed one-tenth of the
membership of the Society.
(2) The candidate must have been a member of the Society for
five years.
(3)

The qualifications for election are:
a. Sustained activity in the field of archaeological or/and
paleontological research.
b. Recognized contributions with emphasis upon publications in archaeology and/or paleontology.

(4)

Election to membership is to be by the Board of Directors
of the Society, which consists of the executive officers and
three directors elected annually.

228

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society
Correction in the 1950 Bulletin

On page 59, line 10 of Mrs. Virginia Watson’s article, "The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect", Volume 21, 1950, of the
Bulletin should read "could now be expapded" instead of "could
not be expanded".
Increase in Dues

Members present at the 1950 Annual Meeting unanimously voted
to increase annual dues in the Society from $3.00 to $5.00. Paid
up membership entitles a member to a copy of the Bulletin without additional cost. The price of all BuIletins was set at $5.00 each.
This is the first time any change has ever been made in either
the membership dues or in the price of the BuLletin; but due to the
rising cost of printing, the increase was necessary in order to continue the publication of the Bulletin. As you probably well know,
the Society depends entirely upon membership dues and the sale
of its Bulletin to meet its financial obligations, and during recent years all expenditures have been limited to printing, engraving, postage and stationery.
E.W.
Stone Beads ]rom Bell County
Mr. W. P. Walker, of Crosbyton, Texas, has found an assortment
.of small stones with holes in them. The stones came from gravel
pits adjacent to Darr Creek in Bell County, eighteen miles south of
Temple. The specimens vary in size from one-half inch in diameter
to three inches in diameter. In shape, they vary from small doughnut-like objects to large irregular masses. The holes in some of
the rocks have been drilled, and some have been formed by natural
causes. The rocks could have been used as crude beads or as
sinkers on a fish net. Mr. Walker reports some similar stones,
which are from Oaxaca, Mexico, on display in the Witte Memorial
Museum in San Antonio. At present, Mr. Walker’s "beads" are at
the Museum, Texas Technological College, Lubbock (Plate 26, II.)
Dr. Ray Honored
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, president emeritus of the Texas Archaelogical
and Paleontological Society, has been elected a l~ellow of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Field Notes
The staff of the Department of Anthropology of the University
of Oklahoma is to be commended for their informative "Newsletters" issued from their field camp this summer. The camp was
on the Illinois River thirteen miles southeast of Tahlequah, Oklal~oma.
Mr. Alex Krieger, University of Texas, spent a month in Mexico
this summer, where he attended the Annual Round Table Conference at Jalapa, and visited many Maya sites.

The University of Texas ran a field school in the vicinity of
Austin the first part of the summer. It was under the direction of
Dr. T. N. Campbell.

Newsnotes and Editorials

229

Texas Tech had their annual field session at the Bormell Site,
in New Mexico. Field work was under the direction of Jane Holden.
The site belongs to the Jornado Branch of the Mogollon. A full
site report is to be prepared this fall.
In regard to field work done by the Texas Memorial Museum,
Dr. E. H. Sellards writes: (quote from Dr. Sellard’s letter)
"Our summer’s w~rk was at the two localities, the city lake at
Lubbock and the Friesenhahn Cave in Bexar County. Both were
very successful. We were especially fortunate in being able to
pr.ove the Folsom culture level at the Lubbock lake deposit. It is,
as we concluded last year on the basis of stratigraphy, the diatomite layer, that is, the layer next above the gray sand. From this
layer we have charred bison bones, which gave age determination
of 9,883 q- 350 years, so that we now have F,olsom age fully proven,
both as to postion and age."
Work at the Lubbock site was under the general supervision of
Mr. Glen Evans. The field party was directed by Dr. Grayson
Meade.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to Miss Jane Holden for several days of her tirn~
spent in helping us prepare and edit the !951 Bulletin.

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER
OF THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Report for the twenty-third year from August 31, 1950
September 30, 1951.

to

RECEIPTS
Balance on August 31, 1950 .......
’.......................$
Collected on 1949 dues .............................................
Collected on 1950 dues ..................................................
Collected on 1951 dues .................................................
Collected on sale of Bulletins
109 @ $3.00 each ..................................................
80 @ $5.00 each .......................................................
Reimbursement for article reprints ...............................

450.80
33.00
339.00
181.00
327.00
400.00
55.34

TOTAL ......................................................................... $1,786.14
DISBURSEMENTS
Southwestern Engraving Co., Dallas, Texas, for
engravings for Vol. 21 ............................................. $ 85.30
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., for
printing Vol 21 (300 copies) ................................ 452.00
Merchants Motor Lines for delivery ..........................
1.99
Postage ............................................................................
18.00
TOTAL ................................................................. $ 557.29
Balance on deposit in First National Bank,
Lubbock, Texas, on September 30, !951 .............. $1,228.85
ERNEST WALLACE,
Secretary-Treasurer.

MEMBERSHIP LIST 19 5 0-’51
HONORARY MEMBERSHIP
Albert G. Ingalls, S~en~c Arner~ca~ Mag~ne,
................................................ _New York City,
MEMBERS

i%1. X.

Abilene Printing & Stationery Co ........................... Abilene, Texas
E. T. Adams............................................ Glen Rose, Texas
A & H S~ociety, Box 79]
_ Roswell, N. M.
American Museum of Natural History.._._New York City, N. Y.
American Philosophical Society .....................Philadelphia 6, Pa.
Baylor University Library................................ Waco, Texas
Dr. Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma ......... Norman, Okla.
.Whitmey, Texas
G. C. Benson, Box 381
Joe Benton ............................................................. Nocona, Texas
J. S. Bridwell, Bridwell Oil Co .............................Wichita Falls, Texas
Crys%al CRy, Texas
W. P. Brennan
Richmond L. Bronaugh, Baylor University.................... Waco, Texas
Mrs. Charles Brower (Hall Ranch) .............. Richland Springs, Texas
Bureau ~f American Ethnology, Smithsonian Insti.tute,
......................................................................Washington, D. C.
C. M. CaldwelL............................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, University of Texas ................ Austin, Texas
Sam Chamberlain ................................................. Refugio, Texas
Chicago Natural History Museum, Roosevelt Road and
............................................... _Lakeshore Drive, Chicago 5, Ill.
Cleveland Public Library......................................... Cleveland, Ohio
Columbia University Library= ....................... New York City, N. Y.
Corpus Christi City Public Library............... Corpus Christi, Texas
Col. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road_......... San Antonio, Texas
Wilson W. Cro.ok, Jr.,. .................. 4130%~ Hyer Street, Dallas, Texas
Dallas Public Library.......................................................... Dallas, Texas
E. C. de Montel, 1000 National Bldg..................... Wichita Falls, Texas
Frederic H. Douglas, Denver Art Museum, 1300 Logan St.,
................................................................................ Denver 3, Colo.
Dr. C. D. Eaves, Texas Technological College ........ Lubbock, Texas
E1 Paso Public Library.
E1 Paso, Texas
Field Museum of Natural History...................................... Chicago, Ill.
W. S. Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick Drilling Co ......... Corpus Christi, Texas
M. F. Faote, 6110 Mimosa Lane......................................... Dallas, Texas
R. E. Forrester, Jr ................................................................Moran, Texas
W: S. Fulton ........................................................: ....... Dragoon, Arizona
Harold S. Gladwin, 534 Valley Road ................ Santa Barbara, Calif.
Frank Grimes ................................................................... ~Abilene, Texas
Hardin-Simmons University Library ........................... Abilene, Texas
R. K. Harris, 9024 San Fernando Way
Dallas 18, Texas
Dr. J. E. Hawkins, Baylor University ................................Waco, Texas

232

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontologica~ Society

Dr. Frank C. Hibbon, 3000 Campus Blvd ............. Albuquerque, N. M.
Dr. T. L. Hodges .................................................................. Bismark, Ark.
Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological College ........ Lubbock, Texas
Houston Public Library_ ................................................... Houston, Texas
Mrs. Charles B. Hunt, 635 Vine Street ...................... Denver, Colo.
Institute Panamericar~o de Geografia e Historia 192 Avenida
................... del Observatorio, Tacubaya, D. F., Republica Nfexicana
Illinois State Museum. .................................................... Springfield, Ill.
A. T. Jackson, 508 E. 46th Street ..................................... Austin, Texas
Henry James ....................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Edward B. 3elks, 3108 Wheeler Street ............................ Austin, Texas
Joint University Libraries ............................................ Nashville 4, Tenn.
Johns Hopkins University Library ............................ Baltimore 18, Md.
Percy J,ones, Box 176 ......................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. J. Charles Kelley. University of Southern Ill.__.Carbondale, Ill.
Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, 911 S. Van Buren Avenue~_. Dallas 8, Texas
Dr. Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas .................... Austin, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology ......................................... Santa Fe, N. M.
Judge Harry J. Lemley ....................... : ..................................... Hope, Ark.
Eli Lilly, 5807 Sunset Lane .......................................... Indianapolis, Ind.
Louisiana State University General Library ........ Baton Rouge, La.
Kenneth MacGowan, 1727 LeC.onte Avenue. ...... ._Los Angeles, Calif.
A. T. McDannald, Box 2972 .......................................... Houston, Texas
McMurry College ................................................ Abilene, Texas
Metropolitan Museum of Art Library, Fifth Ave. and 82nd St.,
................................................................................ New York 28, N. Y.
Mrs. Glen E. Moore, 3610 Ft. Blvd ................................... Et Paso, Texas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation,
Huntington Free Library ............................... New York City, N. Y.
Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place ........................... Chicago, IlL
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and
42nd Streets ....................................................... New York City, N. Y.
Northwestern University Library ...................................... Evanston, Ill.
Ohio University Library .............................................. Athens, Ohio
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University ................................................... Cambridge, Mass.
W. M. Pearce, Texas Techological College ................. Lubbock, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept. of American Archaeology__..Andover, Mass.
L. E. Rawalt, 725 Post St ...................................... Corpus Christi, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 ............................................. Abilene, Texas
J. Henry Ray, 2130 Fannin St ......................................... Vernon, Texas
Dr. Erik K. Reed, 238 Griffin St ............................... Santa Fe,
P. M. Rice ........................................................................... Hamilton,
Rice Institute Library ........................................................ Houston,
Dr. R. N. Richardson, Hardin-Simmons University....Abilene,

N. M.
Texas
Texas
Texas

Thomas E. Roberts .............................................................. Abilene, Texas
James C. Roe, 900 Duggan Street ............................ San Angelo, Texas
Rosenberg Library ...................................................... Galveston, Texas

Membership List 1950-’51

233

San Antonio Public Library............................... San Antonio, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park ............ San Diego, Calif.
San 3acinto Museum .of History Association ...... San Jacinto. Texas
E. B. Sayles, Arizona State Museum ............................ Tucson, Arizona
Henry Sayles, Jr ................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Karl Schmitt, University of Oklahoma ................ Norman, Okla.
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University....Dallas, Texas
Judge O. L. Sims ...................................................... Paint Rock, Texas
Dr. R. E. Smallwood, 518 Holly St ........................ Fayetteville, Ark.
Prof. Victor 3. Smith, Sul Ross College ....................... Alpine, Texas
Smithsonian Institution ..........................................Washington, D. C.
Society des Americanistes, Musse de L’ I-Iomme,
Palls de Chaillot ............................................................... Paris, France
F. J. Soday, 1124 West Elm Street .............................. E1 Dorado, Ark.
Southern Illinois University Library ............................ Carbondale, Ill.
Southern Methodist University Library ................ : ....... Dallas, Texas
Southwest Museum Library, Highland Park 42_.Los Angeles, Calif.
Southwest Texas Museum Association ....................... Uvalde, Texas
Stephen F. Austin State Teachers’ College
Library ...................................................................... Nacogdoches, Texas
R. L. Stephenson, P. O. Box 592 ................................ Ann Arbor, Mich.
Floyd V. Studer, 636 Amarillo Bldg ............................. Amarillo, Texas
Walter W. Taylor, Jr., ~/11 Camino del Monte Sol._Santa Fe, N. M.
Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College
Library ................................................................ College Station, Texas
Texas State Library, Capitol Building ............................ Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library......................... Lubbock, Texas
Texas Western C.ollege .................................................... E1 Paso, Texas
Thomas Gilcrease Foundation .............................................. Tulsa, Okla.
Mrs. Elizabeth W. Crozier Turman, Box 116, King’s Canyon
Road ............................................................................. Carson City, Nev.
Tyrell Public Library.................................................. Beaumont, Texas
University Museum Library, Univ. of Penn.,
33rd and Spruce ................................................... Philadelphia 4, Pa.
University .of Arizona Library. ................................... Tucson, Arizona
University of Arkansas Library.......................... Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library.................................... Berkeley, Calif.
University of California at Los Angeles .............. Los Angeles, Calif.
University of Chicago Library ........................................... Chicago, Ill.
University of Colorado Libraries .................................... Boulder, Colo.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library ................... Denver, Colo.
University of Illinois Library ............................................... Urbana, Ill.
University of Kansas Library
_Lawrence, Kans.
University of Michigan Library .......................... Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Nebraska Library ...................................... Lincoln, Neb.
University ,of New Mexico Library .......... _Albuquerque, N. M.
University of Oklahoma Library
........ Norman, Okla.
University of Texas Library.
........ Austin, Texas

234

Texas ArcheoZogical and paleontological Society

University of Utah Library
Salt Lake City 1, UL~h
Mrs. W. C. Vernon, Texas Technological College....Lubbock, Texas
Waco Public Library ................................................ Waco, Texas
Dr. Ernest Wallace, Texas Techonological College...Lubbock, Texas
P. H. Walser, 1102 N. 1st St .......................................... Temple, Texas
Frank H. Watt, Box 1176 ............................................... Waco, Texas
Dr. Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons University..... Abilene, Texas
William C. Watts, 2111 23rd Street ............................ Lubbock, Texas
Harry E. Weaver, R. R. Robert Lee .................. San Angelo, Texas
Dr. C. H. Webb, Children’s Clinic............ Shreveport, La.
.Joe Ben Wheat, University of Arizona ...................Tucson, Arizona
Winkler County Free Library .......................................... Kermit, Texas
Wisconsin State Historical Society, 816 State Street
.. ........................................................................... Madison 6, Wisconsin
A. H. Witte ................................................................... Henrietta, Texas
Witte Museum ........................................................... San Antonio, Texas
R. B. Worthington, 4216 Walker Ave ............................ Houston, Texas
Bill Wright, 1226 Sylvan Drive ....................................... Abilene, Texas
Yale University Library..................... ~ .................... New Haven, Conn.

ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
The Texas Archeological Society (TAS) offers a wide range of opportunities for
those interested in Texas heritage. The mission of the Society is to promote study,
preservation and awareness of Texas archeology.

A recent strategic plan calls for the

Society to create training opportunities for students, enhance and expand programs,
increase and diversify membership, inform the community of their archeological heritage
and cultivate and preserve resources~ The membership generally numbers around 1400.
The Society calendar begins in October with the Annua~ Meeting, an event that
has taken place since 1929. Archeologists, professional and avocational, get together to
share information in research sessions and to hear from nationally renowned luncheon and
banquet speakers. Friday is a popular evening for the punic forum with high profile
speakers and artifact identification. Meetings will be held in Lubbock (08) and Del Rio (09).
Each spring TAS offers sessions of the Texas Archeology Academy. Topics in
this series of workshops include Archeology 101 (including a field day), Ceramics: The
Stories Pottery Tells, Lithics: Reading Stone Tools, Historic Archeology and Rock Art of
Texas. Each Academy features power point presentations, a manual and hands-on
activities to reinforce concepts presented. In 2009 sessions will be held in Georgetown,
Study Butte, and Lake Jackson. Surveys at the dose of sessions reveal that participants
greatty value the information imparted during the workshop and the camaraderie of fellow
students.
The summer brings a field school that offers an opportunity for folks to
contribute to research about Texas archeology. The principal investigator is supported
by staff and experienced volunteers. Usually around 300 people participate. Newcomers
appreciate an orientation session before joining crews in the field.

Survey and lab

sessions provide other venues for people who want to learn more about the archeological
process.

The field school in 2009 will be in the Panhandle near Perryton.

We offer

scholarships to college students and Native Americans. A youth program instructs around
60 students each year.
PuNications of the Society include a journal, the Bulletin of the TAS, a quarterly
newsletter and two web sites. ~Jw,tx~b~or~g is the organizational web site that relates
current programs and opportunities. The other web site is www,texasbeyondhistory.net, a
venue that offers information in the form of multi-level exhibits.

TAS has been a

supporting partner of Texas Beyond History since its inception.
For more information about TAS see ~,ww.txarc~.or9 or call 800 377-7240.

Facsimile Reprint
w~,nvv.gustavslibra ry.corn

