BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society

Volume One

SEPTEMBER
1929

Published
by the
Society at
Abilene,
Texas

BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society

Volume One

SEPTEMBER
1929

COPYRIGHT 1930 BY TEXAS ARCHAEOLOGICAL
AND

PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Published
by the
Society at
Abilene,
Texas

The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
OFFICERS
CYRUS N. RAY, President
JULIUS OLSEN, First Vice President
E. B. SAYLES, Secretary-Treasurer
DIRECTORS
CYRUS N. RAY, D. O.
JULIUS OLSEN, Ph. D., Sc. D.
E. B. SAYLES
W. C. HOLDEN, Ph. D.

H. G. PAYNE
RUPERT N. RICHARDSON, Ph. D.
GEORGE C. ENGERRAND, M. A.

REGIONAL VICE PRESIDENTS
COLONEL M. L. CRIMMINS,
Fort Sam Houston
DR. J. A. UDDEN, Austin

DR. JOHN C. GRANBERY, Lubbock
H. T. FLETCHER, Alpine

TRUSTEES
DR. JOHN C. GRANBERY, DR. STEWART COOPER, W. C. RINEY
Three Years
C. A. HOWARD, DALLAS; PROF. OTTO O. WATTS., JUDGE W. R. ELY
Two Years
GEO. C. MARTIN, ROCKPORT; ERNEST W. WILSON, JUDGE FRED COCKRELL
One Year
STANDING COMMITTEES
Membership: H. G. PAYNE, LEROY C. GLASS, O. O. WATTS.
Publications: DR. JULIUS OLSEN, FRANK GRIMES, DR. W. C. HOLDEN.
PROGRAM: DR. OLSEN, Paleontology; DR. RICHARDSON, History;
DR. HOLDEN, Anthropology.

FOREWORD
History
All authorities seem to agree that less is known about the prehistory and archaeological remains
existing in Texas than those of possibly any other state. A little over two years ago your president and
secretary undertook the task of investigating the region near Abilene by utilizing week-end and holiday
periods. A little more than a year’s work revealed that the section surrounding Abilene had been inhabited
not alone by the crude hunting tribes found in occupation of the country at the time of the conquest but by
different tribes or peoples which had elaborated several distinctly different flint cultures.
Human bone and flints have been found at all levels from surface deposits to deposits stratified in
hard clays at levels of one, two, over three, six and finally at a depth of eight feet and more below the
surface. So much was found in the limited time available that it was soon realized that such a large
undertaking could better be carried out on under auspices of a scientific society.
So in response to a call issued by a small group of Abilene business and professional men, including
science professors of the local colleges and university, a meeting was held in October, 1928, which
resulted in the formation of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society.
Meetings have been held since that date on the first Tuesday night in each month. At each meeting a
scientific paper was read and discussed. A number of these will be printed in this issue of the Bulletin of
the society.
Objects of the Society
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking; for the
study of the history, prehistory and the major and minor artifacts of man and the fossils representing the
past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such
artifacts and fossils in museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of the
researches incident thereto.
Progress Made
During the two years more than two hundred camp and village sites have been discovered near
Abilene and collections of thousands of stone artifacts have been made, a large prehistoric red paint
mine has been discovered, five prehistoric burials have been excavated, the bone of three of which are
fossilized; ten scientists representing some of the leading museums of the North and East have visited
Abilene to examine the finds made by the society. Among them were the head curator of the national
Museum, Washington, D. C., Dr. Walter Hough; the curator, American Section, University of Pennsylvania
Museum, Philadelphia, Dr. J. A. Mason, with four other scientists; Director J. D. Figgins and Honorary
Curator of Paleontology Harold Cook of the Colorado Museum of Natural History, Denver; Dr. A. E.
Jenks, head of the department of anthropology, University of Minnesota, and others.
Extensive investigations of coast cultures have been made by members at Rockport and Corpus
Christi; also of remains in the El Paso country by El Paso and San Antonio members and of the Canadian
river region by Armarillo and Lubbock members.
Publication of the findings of members of the society have been made in two articles in the Scientific
American and in several Associated Press and Science Service articles.

BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society

TABLE

OF CONTENTS

A DIFFERENTATION OF THE PREHISTORIC CULTURES OF THE ABILENE SECTION
by Cyrus N. Ray .............................................................................................................................. 6
SOME RECENT EXPLORATIONS AND EXCAVATIONS IN NORTHWEST TEXAS
by W. C. Holden ............................................................................................................................ 16
AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE EL PASO DISTRICT
by M. L. Crimmins ........................................................................................................................ 23
SOME TYPES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES NEAR ABILENE, TEXAS
by E. B. Sayles .............................................................................................................................. 27
NOTES ON SOME TEXAS COAST CAMPSITES AND OTHER REMAINS
by George Castor Martin ............................................................................................................... 31
THE CULTURE OF THE COMANCHE INDIANS
by Rupert Richardson .................................................................................................................... 36

Price $3.00
Abilene, Texas

6

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

A DIFFERENTIATION OF THE PREHISTORIC
CULTURES OF THE ABILENE SECTION
DR. CYRUS N. RAY
Paleolithic Type Artifacts
While making field trips for the study of the local
flora the author has at infrequent intervals picked
up crudely flaked large flint implements of a type
comparable to the Chellean hand axes of European
paleolithic culture. In August, 1927, after reading
some articles in scientific journals which suggested
that there might be evidence of very ancient man in
the Southwest, the author set about making a
systematic search for such evidences.
It had been observed that all such crudely flaked
tools which had been found were found on the crests
or sides of the high gravel capped range of hills
which flanks the lower course of Elm Creek.
It was soon found that the surface of the ground
on these high last terrace gravel hills, was strewn
with crudely flaked hand axes and knives of forms
which apparently duplicated the illustrations of
Chellean tools as depicted in McCurdy’s Human
Origins, Volume One, Figures 34, 36 and 38.
These tools were found to the extent of
thousands of specimens. Most American
authorities dismiss all such flint artifacts as
“rejects” of the modern Indians, pieces of flint
which in the making showed knots or flaws and
were rejected when almost roughed out by the
hammerstone process. This may be true but
nevertheless there are very many of these tools
which show no apparent flaws or knots and
appear to be completed tools of the crude sinuous
edged type supposed to have been made
exclusively before pressure flaking was invented.
Most of these tools are large but the author has a
number of slender and comparatively thin ones
obtained from this region.
A curious fact observed has been that these
more slender and better worked artifacts of
hammerstone type are usually found lower down
towards the bases of these gravel caps on the sides
facing the creek, while the larger ones are found
on the tops and higher slopes.

No hearths, hammerstones, chip piles or other
satisfactory evidence of the local manufacture of
these tools has been found.
The place where these artifacts are found most
abundantly is near Abilene, Texas, on the tops of
the range of hills which flank the course of Elm
Creek at a distance of from one half to two miles
west of it, beginning a short distance north of the
Texas and Pacific Railroad and extending north for
several miles.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Artifacts of the Lowest Terrace

7

vertical gravel pit wall, by a thirteen year old boy.
This boy brought the arrow point to me nearly a
year before the mammoth tooth was found. I went
to the pit at the time and measured the distance from
the top of the gravel pit to the spot where the arrow
was found, which was nine feet.

The level here discussed is that of the lowest
gravel terrace above the present stream beds. At
various places along both Elm and Dead Man
Creeks, situated in Jones and Taylor Counties,
gravel pits have been excavated to depths varying
from twelve to eighteen feet. In these pits many
partly mineralized animal bones and teeth have been
found. Most of these are buffalo bones but mammoth
bones and teeth have also been found. In the Watts
Pit near Hamby, a perfectly preserved fossil
mammoth tooth was recently unearthed at a vertical
depth of about six feet from the top of the gravel
after the surface soil had been removed. The tooth
showed no water worn signs of having been washed
from any other position. At an approximate distance
of sixty feet away a peculiarly beveled arrow point
was said to have been found, undisturbed in the

At the Hill Pit on Dead Man Creek, the negro
workman who stripped off the top soil over the
gravel, gave me three well formed pressure flaked
arrow points which he claimed to have found at
depths of six and seven feet in the gravel. Two of
these were shouldered, stemmed and unbarbed, the
patination being of beeswax color.
The other point was a beautiful specimen of leaf
shaped arrow point with gray blue patination.
In loose gravel in the bottom of an excavation
twelve feet deep at this place, the author found a

HUNTING TRIBES
(Above, on Opposite Page.)
The top panel on the opposite page shows large scrapers, both side scrapers and end scrapers. The
keel-backed scraper is the more common type. The arrows are of rough, thick, heavy crude workmanship.
No manos or metates are found with this culture. Large scrapers are very abundant on the sites. These are
found around small hearths containing six or eight stones with charcoal and ashes in center.

1

2
13

(Lower Panel, Opposite Page.)
3
4
5
12
11
10

6
9

7
8

14
16

17

18

19

15
26

25

24

23

22

21

20

1. Pitted Hammerstone of Small Scraper Culture.
2. Flint saw or large knife, Colorado, Texas.
3. Fine recessed based spear head found with burial, Jones County.
4. Fine channeled spear head, length 4 7/8 inches, width 7/8 inches, Mills County, owned by Mike Siegel.
5. Spear head found with burial, Jones County.
6. Paleolithic type, Elm Creek, near Abilene.
7. Mano stone from Sand Dune Culture, Jones County.
8-9-10-11. Recessed based thick points, of unknown use.
12-13. Spokeshaves, used in trimming arrow shafts.
14-26. Polished stone celts, Small Scraper Culture.
15. Paleolithic type flint pick, Taylor County.
15 to 25. Flints found in gravel pits; No. 20 was found in a vertical gravel wall at a depth of seven
feet and two inches.

8

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

turtleback artifact having a brown beeswax colored
patination. Of course it was impossible to determine
at what level this was stratified.

An Ancient Grave

On the east side of a mountain located about
fifteen miles above Buffalo Gap on Elm Creek, was
The creek valleys in the section described, have
found a burial of a prehistoric man. The rock
at some period in the past been scoured out to much
formation here is of rather soft white sandstone
greater depths than prevail at the present time.
which has been eroded by both water and wind
Subsequently these valleys have been filled to an
action into gullies, among which are small pinnacles
undetermined depth by a thick deposit of gravel
and other fantastic formations having caps of stone
carrying much decomposed limestone. The streams
of somewhat harder texture which have resisted the
have either cut new channels through or to one side
erosive action. On top of a small one of these which
of these deposits.
has a vertical face of eight or ten feet on all but one
On upper Elm Creek above the town of Buffalo side, the farmer who owned the land, Mr. Horace
Gap, the Butchee Pit has been excavated to a depth Heffaner, had found a round pile of flat stones and
of eighteen feet in gravel of the same type. Here I had removed enough of them to uncover a skull
found parts of two pressure flaked blue flint arrow when he replaced the stones without further
points and a yellow patinated keel backed scraper disturbance. I later heard of this and asked for
in the loose gravel on the bottom. At a point a few permission to excavate. This was done with the
miles further up the creek in an old worked pit, I assistance of Mr. Y. P. Kuhn of Abilene, Texas.
found three fossil buffalo teeth and a gray blue flint
With the exception of a few stones where the
stemmed and shouldered arrow point sticking in
skull had been uncovered, the grave seemed not to
the side of the gravel slope at a depth of twelve
have been disturbed; the stones were encrusted
feet.
heavily with moss and lichens and a cedar tree grew
These were in such situation on the surface of in the center, its roots penetrating the length of the
the slope that it is possible they may have washed long bones as well as the interior of the skull. The
from above. At another pit a short distance further body was lying in a natural depression in the rock
up the creek, I saw the end of a piece of flint sticking with the head to the southeast and the leg bones
out of the vertical face of the hard stratified toward the northwest. The position would indicate
undisturbed gravel wall. This was dug out that it may have been buried in a sitting posture as
immediately with a garden trowel in the presence the body and head bones were in the depression
of Mr. Hubert Cooper of Abilene, Texas. This object and the leg bones extended outwards under a large
proved to be a crudely chipped hand axe of a type flat rock. The bones were only a slight distance
showing no evidence of pressure flaking. The depth below the stones and were covered with fine
from the top, measured on the spot, proved to be powdery white sand from decomposed sandstone.
slightly over seven feet.
Nearly the complete skull with lower jaw, twelve
teeth, most of the shafts of the femora, parts of the
In addition to the above, many other instances
humeri and other bones and a large bone bead and
of humanly worked flints have been found in the
a sea shell pendant were found. The long bones are
above described gravel pits by not only the author
mineralized and have a stony clink when knocked
but by many of the gravel haulers and pit owners as
together instead of the usual dull bone sound. The
well.
bead and pendant are both completely fossilized,
Of course the fact that most of these artifacts giving forth the ring of a porcelain dish when tested.
have only been found after having been dislodged The bead is slightly over an inch long by threeand the level of stratification lost makes the eighths of an inch think. It seems to have been made
evidence rather inconclusive. Yet the evidence, such of some kind of bone which has a peculiar twisted
as it is, should serve to encourage us to search for grain. It is drilled through the middle lengthwise.
more definite and conclusive information.
The sea shell pendant is one and one-fourth inches

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
long and five-eighths of an inch across. The spiral
end has been cut off and a small hole drilled near
the end which is so small that the point of an ordinary
pin will pass through it but the head will not. The
opposite side of the other end has a small groove
but across it and a somewhat larger hole drilled
through the center of the groove. No flint or other
artifacts were found in this grave.
Most of the shafts of both femur bones were found
although the articular tuberosities were missing from
both ends of each. A peculiar feature of these bones
is that they both have a decided antero postero curve
somewhat comparable to the paleolithic Neanderthal
species of man. Presumably such a man would walk
with bent knees like the Neanderthal species. The
bones are small indicating a very small person.
However, the development of the teeth and their
worn condition shows it to have been an adult of
mature years. The skull is very thin, small and
viewed from straight above, is egg shaped, the small
end of the oval being above the forehead which is
exceedingly narrow but is not as flat, low, or as
receding as the Neanderthal type. The lower jaw is
almost complete, only two small fragments being
missing on the back of the left side. All six lower
molars were intact and five were in the sockets as
well as two premolars. A lower incisor, lower
canine, and the left third molar were found detached
on account of small parts of the back of the jaw
being missing. Two upper teeth, a molar and an
incisor, were found. All of the teeth are thoroughly
fossilized.

9

that a large part of the third molar is behind the
ascending ramus. Neither of the third molars are
worn down although they seem to set as high as the
others. The genial spines are represented by but
slightly marked tubercles, while above them is a
small depression evidently a trace of the genial pit.
The general shape of the lower jaw is best described
by quoting Arthur Keith’s description of a
Neanderthal jaw, “The teeth of Neanderthal man
are arranged in an arch of characteristic form, the
arch being flattened in front and the two sides of
the arch widely separated.” The supraorbital or eye
brow ridges are not markedly developed in this
skull although we would naturally expect a strong
development of such character to accompany its
other features.
The Sand Dune Culture
We now pass to a culture characterized by the
highest development of flint chipping that it has ever
been my pleasure to see. This people made slender,
thin, keen bird points representing the ultimate in
artistic designs, also long slender spear heads and
knives of splendid workmanship.

The camp sites of this culture are always found
in loose sandy post oak land often several miles
away from any present surface water but sometimes
beside springs and in one instance beside a creek
which has permanent water in it. Near some of these
camps are willow trees which probably indicate
the sites of springs which may have existed at some
period when the country was better watered than at
Despite the fact that the lower jaw is small it is present.
of heavy construction and the teeth relatively large.
The small arrow points which vary from fiveThe ascending rami are short but far broader than
eighths of an inch long to two inches, are exceedingly
those of modern Indian lower jaws of much larger
thin and sharpened to almost needle points, the
size. The difference may be illustrated by
fracture marks nearly invisible; some are stemmed
comparison with a huge Mound Builder jaw of the
having long keen barbs and sharp slender points.
author’s collection. The ascending ramus of this
Part of these have only been chipped on one side of
large jaw ascends with a sharp backward slant
the blade leaving the other flat. Other types are
leaving considerable space between it and the third
triangular and less than an inch long. These have
molar. Measured across the ramus at the level of
notches cut deeply into the middle, the ends of the
the top of the latter tooth, it is slightly over one and
bases are curved gracefully inward and the sides
one-eighth inches while the small jaw measured at
of the bases are deeply cleft or serrated. Some are
the same point is nearly one and three-eighths inches
stemmed, notched and barbed at base and deeply
and the latter ramus ascends almost vertically so
serrated throughout the whole length of blade.

10

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

SAND DUNE CULTURE
(Upper Two Panels)
Sand Dune Culture picture shows square based spear points, double pointed knives resembling
Solutrean laurel leaf blades, flint awls or drills and fine bird points. Oval manos used on both sides and
flat sandstone metates are found abundantly in this culture.
SMALL SCRAPER CULTURE
(Lower Two Panels)
The Small Scraper Culture also contains square based spears and double pointed knives. In addition
it contains, pottery, polished stone celts, pitted hammerstones, drills, bird points, beautiful small scrapers,
manos and metates.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

11

Others are small and triangular without indentation.
The investigations of Mr. E. B. Sayles and myself
Many are shaped like slender fir trees in outline.
have shown this culture to be represented by
numerous sites scattered over the loose sandy post
The spears are of two types, a square based long,
oak belts of land covering extensive areas in Taylor,
keen, slender blade represented by several in the
Jones and Callahan Counties. How much larger area
author’s collection. One is six and one-half inches
long by one and one half inches wide and very thin. is covered by this culture is yet undetermined.
This has a beautiful yellow patination. One is three
and one-half inches and another two and one-half
inches long. These are of light tan patination. The
other type of knife or spear point is pointed at both
ends like the Solutrean Laurel leaf blades
represented on Page 178 of McCurdy’s Human
Origins. The latter are also of exceedingly fine
workmanship. Most of them are tan colored and
average about four inches long by slightly over an
inch wide. One in the author’s collection is made
of a glossy black stone which is similar in color to
obsidian but is not translucent. The author has not
been able to find any of the forms of the keel or
convex backed end or side scrapers so common in
all other local cultures. Instead a very few
specimens of a type of side scraper peculiar to this
culture have been found. All other local flint
workers retouched the thick sides by taking off long
narrow chips which curved up over the convex
edge.
Instead the Sand Dune culture man selected the
already thin, sharp edge of the opposite side and
ran an exceedingly minute retouch along the top side
of the edge. The thick edge was left unworked. The
Sand Dune Culture includes awls and drills of
various sizes the bases of which were usually made
round and flat but sometimes irregular.
At two different camp sites forty miles apart,
portions of three skulls have been found. One skull
top found in Jones County and owned by Simmons
University, is of a type similar to the European
Neanderthal man, flat forehead, heavy eyebrow
ridges or bars over the eyes, and exceedingly thick
skull bones.
Parts of two other skulls of the same type were
found by E. B. Sayles and myself in a Callahan
County site. The parietal bones of these skulls were
nearly three-eighths of an inch thick while some of
the basal portions of the skulls were nearly onehalf inch thick.

That the Sand Dune people were more or less
sedentary is indicated by the abundance of well
made manos and the incidence of metates. The manos
are of two types, one a hard oval igneous boulder
rounded on top and thick with the lower grinding
surface flat and highly polished by use. The other
type of mano, which is far more numerous, is flat
on both sides, larger at one end and just fits the
hand. They vary in size to fit various sized hands.
A very large one is seven inches long by four and
three-fourths inches broad and one and one-half
inches thick The usual size is five inches long and
three and one-half inches broad. This type of mano
has usually been used on both sides and some have
been worn quite thin. All of this type were cut out
of a fine grained stone which was soft enough to be
carved by its maker into the desired size and shape.
Many much battered round and flat
hammerstones, made both of hard, tough boulder
stones and of flint, have been found, although those
of flint are most numerous. These people selected
disk shaped flint balls having many depressions and
sharp angles using each sharp edge in turn until
battered off then moving on until all sharp edges
were battered leaving a stone with an almost
continuous battered ring around the outside edge.
All of the Sand Dune sites show considerable
fresh water mussel shell fragments. From one in
particular which is at present situated several miles
from permanent water, near Hawley, Texas, shells
of this type have been obtained. Local farmers have
stated that wagon loads of shell have been hauled
away from this site for chicken feed. When we
consider the general unwillingness of savages to
exert themselves unnecessarily, we must conclude
that they would not carry tons of shell several miles
back into loose sand when high camp grounds
directly above such streams now exist. In this
particular site even willow trees do not now exist.
The only stream from whence the shells could have

12

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

come at present flows two or three miles farther
south and at a far lower level. If it once flowed
past this site as seems probable, it has removed a
tremendous amount of soil in the change.

had removed the top soil. A majority of the artifacts
are deeply patinated. Another indication of age is
the fact that no artifacts of bone, horn, shell or wood
have been found. More than one hundred end and
side scrapers were found at this site. These varied
from the typical large pear shaped end scrapers
through many unique and unusual forms from long
narrow to large and heavy types of side scrapers.

The loose sand in these camp sites was covered
originally with a dense growth of post oak brush
which doubtless held it from much shifting but since
being cleared and put into cultivation it has blown
out and drifted considerably leaving large areas
Small Scraper Culture
where the sand has been removed to depths of
several feet. All of the artifacts and bones found in
This culture has three features which are unique
such sites, have been exposed in this manner.
in this region in that it contains ground and polished
stone celts, pitted hammer stones, and very small
The ancient appearing tan colored patina and
scrapers which are finely chipped all over the back.
utter absence of wood, horn, bone or shell artifacts
These types of artifacts resemble more the work of
taken with the other considerations outlined above,
the northern mound builders than of any local
constrains one to believe that this is a very ancient
culture.
culture.
Thus far the author has examined three camp sites
of this culture. In them were found two polished
Culture of the Bifurcated Base
stone celts, one is straight, four and one-half inches
A local center of dispersal of bifurcated based
long, smaller at each end, one and three-fourths
arrow points is situated a short distance west of
inches wide in the middle and nearly one and oneBuffalo Gap on upper Elm Creek. This large camp
half inches thick. It is made of a fine grained olive
site covers a red soil slope which declines gently
green stone and polished all over. The other one is
to the creek bank on the north.
four and one-fourth inches long and two inches
Here were found many broken bifurcated points broad at the sharpened broad cutting end from which
of large size, also a few other large roughly chipped it curves backward to a small pointed upper end. It
points of the usual straight ended bases. At this place is polished and of a grayblue tough stone. In so far
were found flint chip piles scattered over a large as the author knows these are the only specimens
area and among them many battered hammerstones. of polished stone celts that have ever been found in
Here were found many pear shaped, round ended this region. Most of the scrapers are less than an
scrapers of large size, several drills which were inch wide and less than one and one-half inches
barbed and tanged like arrow points as well as many long although a few are larger. All have been finely
shell fragments. A peculiar feature of this culture is chipped to a beautiful finish all over the backs and
most of them have been brought to a sharp point at
the large number of broken arrow heads found.
the end opposite the broad cutting end. The arrow
Whether these people used such a strong bow
points of this culture are of fine workmanship,
that it broke more of their points when shot or
serrated and usually beveled to the right. Manos,
whether the large size has caused them to have been
metates, fine hammerstones, drills, knives pointed
found more readily, I do not know, but considering
at each end, and long thin fine spear points were
the number of halves found, relatively few large
found. Two large oval pitted hammerstones of dense
whole ones are in the author’s collection. No manos
hard stone, were found. Many large circular areas
or metates were found in bifurcated base arrow
covered with limestones of about the size of one’s
camp sites.
fist, mixed with mussel shells are seen. No artifacts
Most of the artifacts in such sites were found as made of material other than stone and pottery have
a result of deep plowing or where washes or gullies been found belonging to this culture. Fragments of

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

13

Peculiar Types of Undetermined Culture
thick pottery, brown on the outside and black inside,
Along the Clear Fork of the Brazos near
of both plain and incised or indented decoration,
Centerline, Texas, I have found a new and very
have been found with this culture.
peculiar type of flint artifact.
Red Paint Mine
These are thick wide points of rough
In the southern part of Taylor County near Lawn,
Texas, I investigated a supposed “Spanish mine”
which was found instead to have been the work of
the aborigines. Here extending for a distance of a
half mile or more in a north and south direction
along the brow of a high limestone ridge, is an
almost continuous series of excavations in hard
rock. These vary from six to eight feet deep and
some are over thirty feet across. Some prehistoric
people has excavated a tremendous quantity of hard
stone to get at a vein of red stone which lies under
it. Most of these pits have considerable soil and
debris in the bottoms. No excavations have yet been
undertaken to determine the nature of the tools used
in this tremendous prehistoric excavation. I found
on investigation that the people who mined the area
had carried quantities of the red stone to a flat space
to the west side of the hill where it was found
scattered thickly over the ground. On the ground
around were strewn many pear shaped end scrapers.
Most of these were about one and three-fourths
inches wide by two and one-half inches long,
although a few were larger. More than a hundred
such scrapers were found where soil erosion had
exposed them.
In many cases from one to three scrapers were
found lying around a large stone just as the workman
had left them on his last visit. Experiments
conducted with these scrapers showed that the red
stone may be readily shaved off in the form of a
fine red powder which resembles rouge. One may
apply this dry with the finger. Thus used it makes
an effective red face paint. The color is very similar
to the red color used on the painted rocks near the
town of Paint Rock, Texas.

hammerstone workmanship slightly over two inches
long and a little over one and a half inches broad.
The most peculiar feature is the scooped out base
so made that one face is shorter than the other. The
shorter face is almost flat while the longer other
side is slightly convex. In some cases the dished
out base seems to be polished inside. A large camp
site of this culture was found on a white limey hill
near Nubia, Texas. The spear and arrow points
found were either square based elongated triangular
points or unstemmed and unbarbed of elongated fish
like form with recessed slightly expanded bases.
All of the artifacts were covered with a heavy white
patina. All the evidence points to an ancient culture.
The recessed base artifacts resemble gouges more
than anything seen in texts but the author has not
seen them described or pictured in any text. One of
these was recently found by the author where it had
washed out of an ancient wind blown deposit. It
was incrusted with this deposit.
Another interesting type of artifact is a point two
and a half inches long and three-quarters to an inch
across.
It is apparently of rough hammerstone
workmanship with sinuous edges. These artifacts
are very slightly shouldered and stemmed, in fact
are just such arrow points as one would suppose
that very early man might have made. All specimens
are heavily patinated. Both of the above types are
found scattered along the eroded margins of the
gravel hills immediately above the streams of this
section. At no place has the author found such arrow
points in association with any camp site culture.

At several camp sites along the Brazos many
finely worked small beveled arrow points have
Flint spear and arrow points as well as knife
been found most of which are beveled to the right.
blades of several different types were found at this
Out of fifty four in my collection only eight were
site.
found to be beveled to the left. Experiments carried
on by the Smithsonian proved that arrows so made
rotated as they were beveled when shot. Thus the

14

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

American aborigines had discovered the principle
used in modern rifles many years before our
ancestors made use of it.
Among forms of arrow points sometimes found
are triangular long and short points with either
square or concave bases, narrow willowleaf shaped
points with rounded bases, almond shaped points
of both large and small sizes. Some points are
barbed and stemmed with blades curved to the right
or left in such manner as to unfit them for use as
arrows. One of a still different type in the author’s
collection has an appearance as though an arrow
had been sharply bent in the middle. When this
specimen is laid flat the point of the blade curves
up like a bent leaf.
Another curious specimen in the collection is of
leaf shape four and one-eighth inches long and one

and seven-eighths inches broad and tapering to a
fine point at the other end. This specimen has two
notches cut into one side of the base forming a stem
on that side, the other side of the base is rounded
and not notched.
Flint scrapers have been made in numerous
forms and sizes. A peculiar type occasionally found
is four inches long, sickle blade shaped, threefourths to an inch wide and brought to a point like a
sickle at the curved end. Both sides are chipped to
sharp cutting edges.
Another peculiar type of elongated triangular
square based spear point has a channel which begins
at the base and extends more than half way up the
center where it curves out to the edge at this point.
The channel is sometimes on but one face and in
some specimens on both faces. It evidently was
made for the purpose of facilitating bleeding from
the wound. Such points have been found on two
camp sites situated along short dry branches of
creeks which are now several miles from
permanent water. Several of this type were also
found in the recessed base culture camp site
mentioned above. These artifacts are heavily
patinated.
In conclusion it may be stated that the above is
only a small indication of what could be said about
the cultures of the Abilene section, in fact to do
justice to the subject would require a book.
However, if this paper serves to make known the
almost limitless opportunities open to the student
of archeology in Texas and to interest serious
students in such scientific investigations, it will
have promoted a desirable end.
Two Primitive Skeletons Found

Skull found by Dr. Ray in the sixth stratum at a
depth of between six and seven feet near
Albany, Texas. Cut courtesy of Scientific
American.

Some time after the foregoing paper was read
and during the month of February, 1929, I was
taken by Mr. Thomas L. Blanton Jr., to the ranch
of his grandfather, Mr. J. A. Matthews, who lives
near Albany, Texas. While there the information
was given that there were human bones projecting
from near the top of a high bluff over the Brazos
river. I was taken to the spot by Mr. Bob Bradford,
an employee of the ranch. Here was found a steep

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
bank forty feet high overlooking the river, six feet
down from the top two human femora or thigh bones
were seen projecting from under the edges of three
large flat rocks. It was noted that there was six feet
of horizontally stratified clay soil above them which
had not been disturbed except for a few inches
above the burial. The soil had formed in six
different colored layers of different soil textures
above them after a shallow surface burial had been
made. The first skeleton was found to be lying on
the right side folded jack knife fashion with the feet
and head farthest in the bank. The body was buried
under six large flat limestones.

15

the bones, when excavated but later a bird point
flat on one side was found in the hard dirt from the
hole. Several mussel shells were buried with them.
The bones are mineralized and some of the long
bones are very thick and quite heavy.

Mr. Matthews, who has lived near the site for
over fifty years, stated that the river had not been
out of its banks at that point but four times during
that period. When one considers the height above
the present stream level, it is doubtful that water
very often gets above the site. So there is every
probability that an immense period of time was
required to deposit the various clay strata
Most of this skeleton including the skull and overlaying the burial.
lower jaw and most of the teeth were recovered in
good condition. At a distance of about six feet north
Wide Distribution of Manos and Metates
in the same stratum some rib bones were seen
Investigations made by the author have shown
projecting. Here the larger part of a second skull
that the flat oval manos and shallow sandstone
and a complete lower jaw and many other parts of
metates of the western type are found over an area
another skeleton were found.
extending from Stonewall County in the west to
Both skulls have heavy beetling eye brow ridges Tarrant County in the east and from Haskell County
and flat skull tops with practically no foreheads. in the north to Comanche and San Saba Counties in
The skull bones of each are quite thick and are the southeast.
mineralized. There are various unusual curvatures
This embraces an area roughly 200 miles from
to the shafts of the long bones and some peculiarities
north to south and 250 miles from east to west. Over
at the knee joints. While most of these are suggestive
this same area are also found many right hand
of Neanderthaloid affinities, there are other unlike
beveled arrow points. Thus it is shown that a people
features, such as flat tibiae and projecting chins
with several distinctive forms of artifacts at some
containing mental spines.
period occupied a vast area in Central Texas.
The lower jaws and teeth are quite heavy and
the teeth much worn. No artifacts were found with

16

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

SOME RECENT EXPLORATIONS AND
EXCAVATIONS IN NORTHWEST TEXAS
THE CANADIAN VALLEY
W. C. HOLDEN
The existence of ruins of small stone buildings
in the Texas Panhandle has been known for a
considerable length of time. They were first
reported by Professor A. F. Bandelier. Then, T. L.
Eyerly, at the time a teacher in the Academy at
Canadian, Texas, published two brief accounts
describing the ruins along the Canadian River and
Wolf Creek. Sometime later Dr. J. Walter Fewkes,
attracted by Eyerly’s report, visited the Wolf Creek
ruins and spent a short time in that vicinity. The
next person to become interested in the Panhandle
region was Dr. Warren K. Moorehead of Phillips
Academy, Andover, Massachusetts.

southeast of Perryton are the remains of about
twenty stone buildings. About twenty-five miles
southwest, on the main Canadian, is another group
on the King Ranch. To the west, near the town of
Stinette, are two groups, one located on
Cottonwood Creek and the other on Tarbox Creek.
Across the river to the southwest are other groups
of ruins on Antelope and Dixon Creeks. North of
Amarillo on the Landergin ranch is another group.
Recently, Mr. Floyd V. Studer of Amarillo has
announced the discovery of another group, but, as
yet, has not disclosed its location.

In order to obtain additional knowledge of the
As practically all of the archaeological prehistoric culture in the Panhandle, a party
expeditions in the Southwest prior to that time had consisting of Professor Leroy C. Glass, head of the
been made in New Mexico, Colorado, Utah and Science Department of McMurry College, Cecil
Arizona, Dr. Moorehead became convinced that a Brown, Martin Hines, Luke Medley, and Buckner
survey of the Arkansas and Canadian valleys would Osborne, students, and myself made a brief visit to
reveal some interesting facts. Accordingly, in 1917 the Canadian valley in April, 1929. We spent a day
a field assistant, in co-operation with Professor T. at the Handley ranch on Wolf Creek, inspecting the
B. Thoburn of the Oklahoma State Historical ruins there, and especially studying the five houses
Society, made an exploration of the Canadian valley. excavated by the Moorehead expedition in 1920.
About thirty groups of ruins were found and mapped We found Mr. Handley very courteous and
by these gentlemen. In 1919, Mr. C. B. Franklin accommodating. He is to be complimented upon
made additional explorations in the Canadian valley the efforts he is making to preserve the ruins on his
and reported more than seventy sites. The next year, land for scientific study.
1920, a third and larger expedition was conducted,
Next, we went to the Cottonwood-Tarbox
this time by Dr. Moorehead in person. A preliminary
vicinity. The mouth of Cottonwood Creek enters
account of the summer’s work was published in a
the Canadian River just east of the new bridge on
pamphlet issued by Dr. Moorehead in September,
the highway from Borger to Stinette. Tarbox Creek
1920. A year or two later the same article, with
flows into the river about a mile west of the bridge.
pictures, appeared in the American Anthropologist.
As the two creeks extend northward, they diverge
A full report of the findings has not yet been
slightly. At a distance of two miles from the river,
published on account of lack of funds. It is hoped
they are something like two miles apart. The new
that Dr. Moorehead will soon be able to publish
paved highway runs between them.
the long delayed volume, as the need for it is
For a distance of some four miles from the river,
becoming more and more pressing.
numerous springs abound along both creeks. In
Dr. Moorehead’s preliminary paper gives the
Tarbox Creek there is running water for more than
general location of the major groups of ruins. At
three miles. At a point about one half mile from the
Handley’s ranch on Wolf Creek about fifteen miles

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Canadian it sinks within the sand and disappears
from sight. The country immediately adjoining both
creeks is broken, wild, and colorful.
Cottonwood Creek held a disappointment for us.
We found the site of the ancient ruins a bustling oil
field. The Borger field north of the river extended
up Cottonwood. As fate would have it, the most
intensive development was among the ruins.
Trenches had been dug and pipe lines laid in every
direction. Many of the ruins which had not been
disturbed by wells or trenches had been dug into
by curious oil employees while off duty. The Phillips
Petroleum Company has a refinery and pump station
on the site of an old cemetery. An employee who
was there when the plant was built two years ago
told us how bones and fragments of pottery were
blasted out when the ground was being prepared
for the foundations. By careful searching, we found
a few ruins among the wells which had not been
disturbed.
On Tarbox Creek we found the ruins in a better
state of preservation. Fortunately, archaeologically
speaking, little oil has been found immediately
adjacent to the creek. Although the ruins extend over
a considerable area, our operations were confined
to a small group near the creek. Five of these ruins
are located on a hill just off east, and overlooking,
the creek at a distance of about a mile and a half
north of the river. For our own convenience, we
called the place Tarbox Hill. Ravines on the north
and east of the hill isolated it and made it an
excellent place for defense. Its top is about thirty
yards long and fifty yards wide in the widest place.
Its surface is not flat, or level, but enough so to
permit habitation. The arrangement of the ruins is
shown in Figure 1.

17

northeast corner and along the east end. About two
and one-half feet from the north wall and one foot
from the east wall were a number of fragments of
pottery and charcoal. Near these was a large flat
bone which showed no evidences of having served
as an implement. At a distance of one foot from the
north wall and five feet from the east wall were the
broken pieces of a large, fire blackened pot. It has
since been almost completely restored. Just east of
the pot was a mussel shell and south of it was a
well shaped mano. At a distance of four feet from
the north wall and five feet from the east wall was
a metate. It was so decomposed that parts of it
readily broke off in the lifting. In the end adjoining
the east wall and about equidistant from the north
and south walls was a fire place three feet square.
It was made by placing a single row of slabs on
edge. These slabs were about ten inches high. In
the bottom of this enclosure were evidences of
charcoal and ashes. Nothing else was found in this
room except numerous pieces of exceedingly thin
flint flakes which were scattered promiscuously
through the debris from the surface to floor level.
Ruin B contains twelve or fifteen rooms (see
Figure 2). Time did not permit of sufficient
excavating to be sure of the exact number of rooms.
The whole period we worked on this ruin was one
of repeated surprises. We found walls where none
were expected from surface appearances. More
thorough excavations and study may reveal a
different floor plan than the one given in Figure 2.
The outside dimensions are sixty-eight feet by thirtythree feet. The old floor level is from fourteen to
sixteen inches below the surface. Parts of the old
slab walls were projecting above the surface as in
the case of Ruin A. At other places the walls were
completely covered with soil and debris. The
various walls vary in thickness from twelve inches
to thirty inches. The rooms are built on diverse
geometric patterns. Some are rectangular; some are
round; some are oblong; and some are rectangular
on one side and circular on the other.

Ruin A was the first to be excavated. It consisted
of one room about fifteen feet square. All the corners
were slightly rounded, and the northeast corner was
considerably so. The walls were between fourteen
and sixteen inches thick and were of slab structure.
The walls were easy to distinguish as many of the
Room one was almost entirely excavated with
slabs were still projecting more than a foot above
the exception of a small block in the center. But
the ground. The old floor level was about fifteen
few artifacts were found aside from the usual
inches below the surface. All the artifacts which
numerous flint chips. Two pieces of bone and a
we found were uncovered at floor level in the

18

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

number of bone fragments were found on the floor
level in the southwest corner, twenty-one inches
from the south wall and five feet from the west wall.
A mano was lying on the floor midway between
the east and west walls and one foot from the south
wall. In the northeast corner near the north wall
about four feet from the east wall was a pressure
flaker made of stag horn about eight inches in length.
Charcoal was found in a number of places on the
floor level. An examination of the walls revealed
that the stone work began about twenty-six inches
below the surface, or ten inches below the floor
level.
The petition wall between Rooms 3 and 4 was
of peculiar interest. There was no evidence on the
surface of the presence of a wall. Judging from the
general plan of the house, I suspected there should
be one. Some digging uncovered a wall of horizontal
masonry superimposed on slab structure. Some
sixteen inches was of slabs and ten inches of the
horizontal type. The partition wall between Rooms
4 and 6 was entirely of crude horizontal masonry.
Adjoining the west wall of Room 3 is a small
circular enclosure of slab walls. The outside
diameter is six feet and the inside diameter is four
and a half feet. Beneath two layers of slabs, lying
flat, or sloping, and covered with soil, and scattered
among three other layers of slabs were two
skeletons. One was that of a child about two years
of age, and the other a larger child or a small sized
woman. The two skulls were together, touching each
other and in an upright position. Both skulls were
badly decomposed. Their sides were of paper
thinness. The topmost parts were a little thicker.
When first uncovered the shapes of both were
clearly distinguishable. There were no bones found
corresponding to the larger skull. They may have
been entirely decomposed. A number of bones
corresponding to the smaller skull were found
scattered among the crevices of the layers of rock.
The most interesting discovery in this place was
found below the level of the skeletons. At a depth
of twenty-four inches was encountered a two inch
layer of charcoal dust mixed with soil. Digging
deeper, we found at the depth of thirty-six inches a
six inch layer of substance which appeared to be

decomposed ashes and charcoal. We dug a tunnel
to the north and found that the substance extended
beyond and below the wall of the cist. It then
occurred to us that the ash layer might be older than
the heavy, outside west wall of Room 3. We
accordingly extended a tunnel to the west and found
the stratum reaching below and beyond that wall.
We did some excavating in the northwest corner of
Room 4 but time did not permit us to clear more
than two square yards of floor space.
Ruin C consists of a single, round room located
apart from the other ruins. Its diameter is about
twelve feet. The walls were of unusually heavy
slabs. From its general appearance and isolation,

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

19

Ruin E was a single room of rounded, oblong
it may have been some rudimentary form of kiva.
There had been some promiscuous digging in it by shape. It measured six feet across and eight feet in
vandals who doubtless thought it an Indian grave. length. Some one had already dug into it at two
places. We did not disturb it other than to measure
From the standpoint of artifacts in both variety
and chart it.
and number, the north room of Ruin D proved to be
the most interesting spot on the hill. The two rooms
At a point two and a half yards from the northeast
of the ruin are circular in form; the diameter of the room of Ruin B, ten yards from Ruin D, and nine
south room is about eight feet and that of the north yards from Ruin E, we found a skeleton. It was
room about seven feet. Something like half of the under several layers of slab rock at a depth of
north room was excavated. We secured about forty fourteen inches. It was in embryonic position, lying
artifacts consisting of small manos, flint knives, a on its left side with the head pointing south. The
bone spade, scrapers, reamers, a bone awl, a bone skull had been partly crushed by the settling of the
needle and several spear heads. One of the spear rocks above it. There were no mortuary objects of
heads is a beautiful specimen of agate-like material. any kind connected with the burial.
It is noteworthy that no fragments of
pottery of any kind were to be found
either on the surface or the sides of the
hill. A careful search on the part of
several members of the party failed to
reveal so much as a single piece.
Numerous fragments can be had by
digging on the hill top, whether inside
or outside the ruin, but none were found
nearer than twelve inches from the
surface.
The time allotted us to spend on
Tarbox Hill was all too brief. I left
feeling that we had scarcely made a
beginning. Much more work will be
necessary on this group of ruins before
all the secrets which it may hold can
be known. I will not venture any kind
of generalization, for the facts are as
yet too meager. Years of work and an
accumulative body of data may make
conclusions possible some time in the
future. It is in this regard that we stand
so much in need of the publication of
Dr. Moorehead’s findings.
The gravest danger which may
come from delay of scientific
exploration and excavation in this
region is that of vandals. Almost every
easily discernible ruin has already
been dug into somewhere.

20

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Conversation with people who have lived in the
country for sometime convinced us that every ruin,
regardless of its shape or size, is regarded as an
“Indian grave.” Furthermore, all “Indians” mean
the same thing to them. There is a popular belief to
the effect that Indians had money buried with them,
and it is to find Spanish gold, Indian beads or other
curios that many are prompted to dig. This being
the case, it seems probable that the excavation of
the Panhandle ruins will turn into a race between
the scientist and the treasure and curio hunter.
Kent County

stratum of soft gyp rock between five and six feet
thick, above which is a stratum of gravel and sand
about five feet thick. The only surface indication of
the grave was a piece of sandstone rock about the
size of a half brick. Jim Latham reasoned that it
was unnatural for that rock to be at that particular
place. About six inches below the surface were a
layer of two inch slab rocks, under which were
some animal bones. Then, after digging through some
sixteen inches of soil, sand and gravel, we came to
several layers of rock. Some of these rocks were
boulders and slabs of limestone which had been
carried from a distance, and some were pieces of
gyp rock from nearby cliffs. Altogether the layers
of rocks were about eighteen inches thick and were
placed in such a way as to form a sort of vault for
the skeleton below. The skeleton was that of a man,
and was in embryonic position on its left side with
the head pointing east. The face was looking south
and downward at an angle of about thirty degrees.
The bones were soft and were taken out with
difficulty. Some of them were nothing more than
lime ashes.

My interest in Kent County began during the
winter of 1928-1929, when it occurred to me that
the rough, wild, broken country immediately
adjoining the Double Mountain River in Northwest
Texas would have been an excellent region for
ancient man to have lived and defended himself.
Accordingly, in company with Looe Miller of
Rotan, and one of my students, Buckner Osborne, I
made a visit to Kent County in March, 1929, to
verify my theory. We were fortunate in becoming
acquainted at the outset with Jim Latham, a Kent
The technical peculiarities of the skeleton have
County cowboy and rancher, who has lived in the since been described by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray as follows:
vicinity for forty-one years, and who knows the
“The skeleton found by Dr. W. C. Holden
River county as intimately as a city boy knows the
has several peculiar features. The skull has
block where he lives. Mr. Latham has spent his life
a quite marked projection of the muzzle
in the open and is very deft in locating old Indian
(prognathism) which is rather unusual in
signs. His faculty of observation is exceedingly keen
modern skulls. The long bones are so
and has something of scientific precision to it. He
fragmentary that it is difficult to determine
immediately conducted us to an Indian grave he had
much concerning any of them except the
previously located.
humerii. Both of the distal ends of the
The site of the grave is on a high point south of,
humerii were preserved, however, these show
and overlooking the river on the Latham place about
a rather unusual feature in the presence of
fifteen miles west of Double Mountains. So far as
supratrochlear foramina.
a commanding view was concerned no better spot
Cunningham’s Anatomy says under
could have been found in the whole country, for it
“Variations—as has already been stated, the
can be seen for ten miles up the river and fifteen or
olecranon and coronoid fossae may
twenty miles down the river. The ridge on which
communicate with each other in the
the grave is located is perpendicular to the river
macerated
bone.
The
resulting
and is about eighty yards long and four to eight yards
supratrochlear foramen is most commonly
wide. Its sides are almost vertical, and its crest is
met with in the lower races of man, as well
about two hundred feet above the river bed. The
as in the anthropoid apes and in some other
grave is about midway of the crest. The ridge is
mammals.”
composed mostly of red clay. Near the top is a

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
But one mortuary object was found in the grave.
It is made of greenish stone resembling Mexican
jade, has the shape of a quarter moon, is exactly
five inches long, one and eleven-sixteenths inches
wide, five-eighths inches thick on the straight side
and comes to a blunt edge on the round side. There
are twenty-six notches on the round side with one
unusually big notch near the center. Nothing exactly
like this object has ever been described, classified
or illustrated by Dr. W. K. Moorehead, or by the
bureau of Ethnology. It is probable that it would
fall under the category of gorgets, or was used for
ceremonial purposes.
About two miles up the river, on the same side,
but in a less commanding location was another
grave of a very interesting character. It had
previously been excavated by Mr. Latham, and in
view of the fact that we found everything else told
us by him very reliable, I believe his description
of it may be worth something. The grave was on
the summit of a ridge of sand and gravel about 310
yards from the river bed. It was covered on the
surface with layers of slabs and boulders. These
rock layers were about sixteen inches thick, and

21

sloped in perfect symmetrical form from the center
to the sides at an angle of about thirty degrees. The
rock covered area was circular in shape and nine
feet in diameter. An excavation seven feet in
diameter was made below the surface layers. At a
distance of forty-four inches from the top, in the
southwest part of the excavation, occupying a space
of less than three feet in diameter and under a crude
rock vault was the skeleton of a woman of
exceedingly small statue. It was in embryonic
position, on its left side, the head pointing east and
the face towards the south as in the case of the burial
described above. Near the head was a collection
of beads of two kinds: (1) small, flat, round, diskshaped beads about the size of a dime, white, and
very hard; (2) long, cylinder-shaped, horn-like, of
dark color, slightly larger around than a pencil, with
a hole through the center.

About midway between the two graves
described above, but on the north side of the river
is an old camp site. It is located on a cliff. The
cliff faces west, is vertical, and is about seventy
feet high. The ground at the summit of the cliff slopes
away from the river. Along the rim of the cliff can
be seen very clear evidences
indicating that the old ground
level of the camp site was
about thirty inches below the
present surface. Charcoal,
broken mussel shells and
artifacts, as well as different
color of soil, made it possible
to distinguish the superimposed stratum without
difficulty. A perfect arrowhead
was found embedded in the
bank at a distance of twentyeight inches below the present
surface. The old ground level
out-crops, due to the natural
slope, at a distance of about
forty yards back of the cliff.
The outcropping could be
traced as fast as a person could
walk because of the line of
Skull found by Dr. W. C. Holden. A jade ornament of peculiar
exposed artifacts, such as
shape was found with the skull.
scrapers, arrowheads, manos,

22

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

broken metates, and a broken stone moccasin last.
On the north end of the cliff within a few feet of the
edge and at place where erosion has exposed the
old ground level is a circular fireplace four feet in
diameter made of slab stones two inches thick set
on edge. The stones were of various sizes and
evenly put together. The fire place was eighteen
inches deep and was filled to a depth of twelve
inches with charcoal and ashes. It may have been a
place for signal fires, as its position commanded a
view of the river for miles in each direction. From
all present indications the sedimentary stratum
above the old ground level of the camp site could
have resulted only from wind action, as there are
no higher adjoining elevations from which the soil
could have washed.
A mile and a half up the river and on the same
side as the camp site just described is another. It is
located on the second terrace. The second terrace
is about thirty feet above the level of the first terrace.
Along the edge of the second terrace is an
outcropping of an old camp site level, as is
evidenced by numerous artifacts, such as arrow
heads, scrapers, manos, broken metates, broken bits
of pottery, old hearths, and numerous mussel shells.
A few feet back from the edge where the ground is
unwashed there is from six to twelve inches of soil
and turf above the old ground level.
Broken metate stones are very numerous along
the various outcroppings. The largest piece found
was half of one. Most of the fragments were two,
three or four inches across. The metates were of
unusual thickness, ranging from one to one and a

half inches, and were made of sand stone. Their
thinness no doubt caused them to be easily broken.
More than a hundred sand stone manos were found
along the outcropping. Pottery fragments were found
in two places. One group of pieces were found in a
shallow gully where the soil had washed out to
slightly below the old level. These fragments were
one-fourth of an inch thick, crude, of a dark material
with something like grass mallet indentations on
the outer surface. The second group of pieces were
thinner, about one-sixth of an inch thick, grey,
smoothly finished on both sides, almost glazed and
had no indication of being fire-blackened.
Several hearths along the outcropping consisted
of aggregations of burnt rocks, usually from eighteen
inches to two feet across. In places were great
quantities of flint chips. At one place the cliff of a
small ravine showed mussels to a depth of two feet.
In all, the outcropping of artifacts extended along
the edge of the second terrace for more than 250
yards.
In conclusion, it would be a matter of guesswork to venture an opinion as to the age of either of
these camp sites. The large number of metates and
manos indicate that the peoples who occupied them
were sedentary tribes. The first terrace in the case
of the second site would have made an excellent
place for the fields of the villagers. Water no doubt
could have been had by digging holes in the sand of
the river bed. It is probable that the sedimentary
stratum above both the old camp sites is of wind
blown origin which would indicate that both sites
are old, and are perhaps, prehistoric.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

23

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE EL PASO DISTRICT
COLONEL M. L. CRIMMINS
Although Texas is the largest state in the Union,
The pre-Pueblos lived from about 1 A.D. to 1000
very little archaeological work has been done in it. A.D. This period is marked by the black on white
Prior to 1923 the study of the prehistoric culture and the corrugated pottery predominating. These
of the Southwest seemed to have been concentrated people lived in little villages of a dozen or more
in the vicinity of the San Juan river near where the rooms, about ten by twelve feet either rectangular
four corners of Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, and or oval and they were sunk in the ground several
Colorado meet. In this section are found the known feet below the surface. They usually selected sites
sites of the Basket Makers, post-Basket Makers, on a low ridge between two canyon systems. They
pre-Pueblos and the Pueblos proper. We have were agriculturists and grew corn, beans, squashes,
recently found evidence of the Basket Makers and cotton, and domesticated the wild turkey and made
the pre-Pueblos in southwest Texas, which extended blankets of turkey-feather cloth. They did not wear
their former known location about seven hundred sandals. They flattened their children’s heads
posteriorly, so the head was as deep as it was wide.
to eight hundred miles southeast.
The first inhabitants of the Southwest who left
an identifying mark of their culture in the lowest
strata of inhabited sites are known as the Basket
Makers. They lived during the period from about
2000 B.C. to 1000 B.C. They were the first to
cultivate a primitive corn, all of which was of the
same type. In the beginning only the older or less
active members of the family cultivated, guarded,
harvested and stored the corn crops. As larger crops
brought more food, caves were used for storage
when available, caches were dug or slab-walled
storage cists were built. These people wore squaretoed fringed sandals, but had no pottery nor
habitations, They were long-headed and of medium
statue. They grew squashes but had no cotton or
beans. They made coiled basketry in the form of
trays, bowls, jars, mats, and large panniers. Fur
cloth was used for blankets. They did not have the
bow and arrow, but had the dart thrower called the
atl-atl, which device added to the propulsive power
of the arm and enabled them to throw their short
spears farther than they could with the hand unaided.
The post-Basket Maker lived from about 1000
B.C. to 1 A.D. and are identified by their crude
gray pottery, with some black on the white, and
undecorated red ware. Their fiber sandals had a
single broad scallop at the toe end, otherwise their
customs and artifacts were very similar to those of
the Basket Makers.

The Pueblos lived in large villages of several
hundred rooms. Sometimes they were built in rock
shelters or in the open. In the latter case the rooms
were built in terraces for purposes of protection
against their enemies. They had well developed
pottery, made crude spoons and mugs with handles.
Their pottery was decorated with geometric and
rectilinear designs. The pottery of the different
Pueblos had characteristic designs. The black-onwhite was characterized by its hardness, so that it
gave a clear bell-like ring when struck. These were
the Indians Coronado encountered in Arizona and
New Mexico from 1540 to 1542.
In referring to the Indian rock pictures of the
Southwest we use the word pictograph as meaning
a painted ideograph or idea expressed by a picture
or symbol and a petroglyph meaning a pecked or
incised ideograph.
The first evidence we find of the interesting
pictographs of the El Paso district, were reported
in John Russell Bartlett’s “Personal Narrative” of
the American-Mexican Boundary Commission from
1850-1854. He shows a number of pictographs at
the Hueco Tanks, which we have succeeded in
relocating. It was on November 13, 1850, that he
first saw them, and even then he deplored the
malicious mischief of those who were painting their
names, initials or dates over these pre-historic

24

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

pictures. This malicious desecration has continued
for eighty years, sometimes with repulsive
obscenities.

Cosgrove of Silver City, New Mexico, and now of
the Peabody Museum of Harvard. This survey was
made in the month of April, 1925. They located a
pre-Pueblo village at Three Rivers, New Mexico,
A close study of the Indian pictures, pottery and
found eleven rooms about eight feet by ten feet,
artifacts of this district has been made by Mrs.
two skeletons buried under the floors of the room,
Burrow Alves, and Mrs. Bruce Smith of El Paso.
one of which was brachycephalic and the other with
And it was through them that so much of this valuable
knees flexed on the chest, and the head covered
material was brought to the notice of the proper
with a bowl like the Mimbres burials. Some
authorities. The El Paso Archaeological Society
fireplaces, pottery, little corn cobs, about the size
started to make a survey of this district six years
of the little finger, many bones of small animals
ago, and located about 20,000 petroglyphs, 2,000
and manos and metates were found in this village.
pictographs and one pre-Pueblo Indian village. The
area covered in this survey extended from El Paso
The West Texas Historical and Scientific
northwest seventy miles to Rincon, and the Detroit Society, largely through the efforts of Victor J.
Ranch, New Mexico, then seventy miles northeast Smith, have located 146 prehistoric Indian sites in
of Rincon to Three Rivers, New Mexico; 100 miles the Big Bend and many of the pictographs in the
south-southeast to the Cornudas Mountains; eighty rock shelters have been faithfully copied in the
miles southeast to Lobo and Van Horn, and about original colors.
100 miles southeast to Dryden, and 350 northwest
About two years ago Dr. M. R. Harrington of
of Dryden to El Paso. We have made frequent
the Museum of the American Indian, of New York,
reports of the pictographs and petroglyphs found in
started to investigate the Pueblo sites around El
this area, and spent the month of January, 1925, in
Paso, and found twelve sites on terraces along the
New York and showed the pictures of the Indian
Rio Grande near the city, the majority of which were
paintings to Dr. Clark Wissler, Chief of
north. They all had fire-cracked stones, scattered
Anthropology at the American Museum of Natural
chips, flint implements, and hammerstones, manos
History, and to Dr. Melvin R. Gilmore at the
and metates. Some sites had no pottery, and others
Museum of the American Indians, of New York.
had coarse undecorated brownish or black ware,
We spent the month of February, 1926, in
while other places had painted Pueblo pottery,
Washington D. C., at the office of Dr. J. Walter
black-on-white, red-on-white, black-on-gray, redFewkes, Chief of the Bureau of American Ethnology,
on-brown and black-on-brown. A few pieces of
Smithsonian Institution, and showed our
straight corrugated ware without notches were
photographs of the Indian pictures to all those who
found and some showed Mimbres designs of
were interested. In January, 1925, we wrote Dr.
animals, much like those found in our petroglyphs.
Fewkes that the study of the petroglyphs on Senator
A. B. Fall’s ranch at Three Rivers, New Mexico,
Dr. Harrington then studied the caves in Brewster
led us to believe, that many of them were made by County in the Big Bend, seventy-five miles south
the pre-Pueblo Indians, as they were similar in of Marathon, on the W. T. Burnhams Ranch. These
design to the pictures on the pottery of the Mimbres caves were found near the head of a picturesque
Indians. Dr. Fewkes wrote us as follows: “So far canyon half a mile from a convenient perennial
as known to me, this is the first time in the history spring and east of Crown Peak. They were about
of archaeological research in the Southwest, that twenty-five feet wide and the same depth, and the
pictographs have served as guides to locate native rubbish dumps showed they had been used for a
cultures in the Pueblo region.”
long time. Most of the fiber material had been
burned, but they found a Yucca basket, cylindrical
We were fortunate in arousing enough interest
in shape and of the checker weave and also, two
to have a survey made of this district and obtained
pairs of sandals of different types and a lot of Yucca
the valuable services of Mr. and Mrs. C. B.
cord and rope, some checker and twilled matting,

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
arrows and fire-sticks, and flint scrapers. Manos
and metates were also found, but no corn, or corn
cobs, so the food material ground must have
consisted of the seeds, beans, or nuts. No pottery
or burials were found. He next visited Eagle Canyon,
south of Santiago Peak found a rock shelter, 600
feet long, 50 feet deep, and 92 feet high near the
mouth of the canyon. He found tinajas nearby that
never dried, and that probably accounted for the
occupation of this great cave. All along the back of
the shelter, he found little crude stone rooms and
also two circular depressions like kivas. Along the
back walls, there were red paintings of pictographs

25

of human hands, men, birds and animals. A flexed
burial was found without the skull. A bowl-shaped
coiled basket, a twined open-work cigar shaped
basket, a big fiber mat, beads of cane and a large
necklace, made of iridescent green beetle legs strung
on fine, fiber cord, were found at this cave. A flint
spear head, two flint knives, and three red paint
stones were found with the burial. No other burials
were found, but storage cists were discovered, lined
with grass, with old fiber sandals and a male and
female clay figurine, painted black and white. He
then made an expedition to the Chisos Mountains,
where he found a rock shelter, which had two types
of coiled baskets, corn cobs, squash seeds,
dark pottery sherds and the foreshafts and
shafts of the atl-atl darts, with beautifully
made flint points.
Since last February Mr. E. W. Coffin
of the Museum of the American Indian,
has continued the work of Harrington. The
University of Kansas unearthed a Pueblo
site two miles north of Alamogordo, New
Mexico, and found many interesting
artifacts.

Three fine examples of petroglyphs. At top, Ojo del
Alamo, New Mexico; at left below, Hammer Handle
Canyon, Alpine district, Texas; below at right, Mimbres
dancing figures, Three Rivers, N. M.

There is quite a difference in the
pictographs and petroglyphs found in
different parts of this district. At the Hueco
Tanks most of the pictographs were
painted in white, or black, a few in red,
only four in yellow and one in green.
There are approximately 1,000
pictographs found in the rock caves of the
Huecos, covering an area of about 600
acres. At the Ojo del Alamo, twenty-five
miles east, northeast of the Huecos, we
found about 1,000 petroglyphs pecked on
the granite rocks. There we found the turtle
symbol of the rocks and Capt. James
Gillette of Marfa, told us that the
“Tortugas” or turtle clan of Apaches once
lived nearby and that was probably their
totem. Ten miles further east are the
Cornudas del Alamo, huge granite rocks
projecting 600 feet above the plain and
covering an area of about 700 acres.
There are three high projections which

26

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

look like horns and as they are on different sides,
only two are seen at one time. This was one of the
landmarks of the wagon road, laid out in 1849 by
Captain Randolph B. Marcy, Fifth United States
Infantry, and was used by many gold seekers enroute
to California and later was a stage station of the
Butterfield Line, from 1858 to 1861, which stage
line extended from St. Louis, Missouri, to San
Francisco, California. Here we find both
pictographs and petroglyphs; of the former, the red
paintings seem to be more recent and three
represented horses. There are probably 1,500
petroglyphs and 500 pictographs found here. On
the surface of a rock, twenty feet by forty feet, is a
mass of petroglyphs, most of them of geometric
designs, and some with human masks with buffalo
horns on the sides or the crown.

Some of these masks were striated and as the
Jumanos were the only people who striated their
faces, they were probably made by that tribe. A
petroglyph showing four doves in flight was
unusually graphic, while another picture showed a
medicine man with his wand in his hand being
attacked in the rear by a mountain lion, while in
front of him was an Egyptian-like mountain lion,
with a trifurcated tail, held horizontally over its
back, with geometric designs on its body. The
typical Mimbres profiles, with the eye on the side
of the head were also found.
Judge W. A. Hawkins of La Luz, New Mexico,
has made a careful study of the Pueblo sites in his
neighborhood and has done much to advance the
interest of others, to do further research in that
locality.

At Rincon and Detroit Ranch, the petroglyphs
are carved on sandstone, and many were pictures
of fish, some over three feet long and one of a lifesized eagle with spread wings on the bed of dried
up water course.

We believe that the future holds in store many
things of archaeological interest in the El Paso
district, and we hope that steps will be taken to
prevent the destruction of our prehistoric Pueblo
sites, and the rock pictures, made by the prehistoric
The petroglyphs near Van Horn and Lobo, were Indians of the Southwest. When sites are found, they
on sand-stone and were quite crude. About three should be reported to the nearest archaeological
miles southeast of Lobo, there is a rock about ten society, in order that steps may be taken to gather
feet by twelve feet and eight feet high, that is the material before it is destroyed by amateurs. The
covered on the top and four sides with crude burials should never be disturbed except by people
carvings.
who are skilled in handling the fragile bones.
The pictographs at Meyer Springs, seventeen
miles north of Dryden, are of a more modern type,
and one showed a stage coach. They are painted in
red or black and have been described by Victor
Smith, in the West Texas Historical and Scientific
Society Bulletin.

Pottery is the usual key to the sites of primitive
man, and by it is determined the multiple occupancy
through stratification. On account of its fragile
character it was seldom found beyond the locality
where it had been in use. Even small fragments of
pottery are of great value. When found by an amateur
only a few specimens should be collected for
Dr. Fewkes was shown photographs of
identification, and a report made of the site to the
petroglyphs of insects, found in Three Rivers, and
El Paso Archaeological Society, if in that district,
wrote me that with the exception of the Mimbres
the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Indian Pottery Pictures, they were the only insect
Society if near Abilene, to the West Texas Historical
pictures he knew of, made by Indians. We found
and Scientific Society if near Alpine, to Dr. E. A.
petroglyphs of the measuring worm, the grasshopper,
Pearce, Professor of Anthropology, University of
darning needle, butterfly, dragon fly, beetle and
Texas, if near Austin, or to the curator of
queen ant.
Anthropology, Witte Museum, if near San Antonio,
We also found a number of human masks on or the Laboratory of Anthropology at Santa Fe, New
corners of rock, showing two sides of the face. Mexico.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

27

SOME TYPES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
NEAR ABILENE, TEXAS
E. B. SAYLES
During the past eighteen months more than a
hundred sites have been located within a radius of
thirty miles of Abilene. Each type of site that has
been noted will be described, but future study of
the territory may show additional sites of a different
kind, as the entire territory has not yet been covered.

identified in various European cultures. Ordinarily
the blades on these sites are heavily patinated. Few
flakes and chips are found on the surface, such as
appear in connection with the typical workshop.

During the latter part of the summer of 1927, Dr.
Cyrus N. Ray noted the resemblance of the artifacts
The classification that follows rests mainly upon associated with these sites to various European
the similarity of location, but accompanying artifacts types.
have also been considered. Unless otherwise
described, all artifacts are from the surface and are
Workshop
of stone. Except where otherwise noted, the site is
Nine miles north of Abilene on the south bank of
upon the surface of the ground, or within plow depth.
Mulberry Creek, is a narrow tongue of land pointing
Usually where a site is upon sloping ground, only a
to the north and ending at the creek’s bank fifty feet
part of it is entirely visible, remainder being either
above it. The surface of the ground slopes toward
covered entirely or only showing in eroded areas.
the immediate drainage of Mulberry Creek.
QUARRIES
Edwards Plateau Remnant
Seven miles southwest of Buffalo Gap, and one
mile south of Elm creek on rough stony land, occur
several massive strata of limestone. The site that is
now reported on is a natural mound-like
prominence, sparsely covered with thin oak and
cedar. Its base is 100 feet above the bed of Elm
Creek.

Along the deeply eroded areas at the edge of the
tract of land, which covers some fifty acres, the
ground is well covered with flakes and chips of
flint. In addition there are fragments of large leaf
blades, complete blades of a rougher type, scrapers,
fragments of specialized implements, blades that
are comparable in thickness to some of the
specialized forms, points, hammerstones, handaxes
and awls.
Evidence of fire is not apparent either in the
form of hearths, burned stones, or charcoal.

Imbedded in the limestone and lying about on
the surface are great numbers of flint and chert
Hearths
nodules. Some of them are intact. Others are
fractured into several parts. Many of the fragments
Twenty miles southwest of Abilene and one mile
south of Mulberry Creek on a small stream draining
show flaking while piles of chips lie close by.
into it, lies a tract of land barely above high water
level.
Calcareous Hills
Commencing two miles west of Elm Creek and
north of the Texas & Pacific Railway running west
of Abilene is a ridge of low gravelly-topped hills
extending in a general northeasterly direction for a
distance of nine miles.

Within 150 feet of this small stream, which is
now only a wet weather drainage, are six hearths.
Each consists of a circle of stones from two and
one-half to three feet in diameter, the stones ranging
in size from a doubled fist to twice as large. The
center of each circle, or oval, is floored with flat
Upon the surface of these hills and well toward
stones. Beneath the flooring is charcoal or dirt
their highest point, are to be seen thousands of roughly
blackened to a soot and in depths of from a mere
chipped blades of diverse forms, comparable in some
trace to five inches.
respects to many utilized artifacts that have been

28

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Some of these hearths are entirely exposed by
erosion, others partly washed away, the balance
barely discernible through protruding stones that
form the outer circle.
On the surface were found scrapers, a large hand
axe, and the fragment of a large thin leaf blade.
The hearth is a characteristic of the campsite also.
The main difference in the two types being the greater
number of hearths, flint chips and artifacts associated
with the camp sites and the location of each with
reference to streams and other water. No single
hearths have been found, but they are frequently found
in groups of only three or four.
Camp

metates, and drills. Mixed in with the plowed
ground with these stone artifacts were numerous
flakes and chips of flint, a few unworked fragments
of flint nodules, many pieces of mussel shells, and
a great quantity of burned stones.
Large Hearth Camp
A type of camp site is frequent, particularly to
the Southeast of Abilene, characterized by hearths
five to six feet across and composed of rocks
smaller than those in the hearths described in this
paper. Flakes, hammerstones and manos are
numerous, but specialized implements are not.
Mussel shells are frequently found in abundance.
These hearths are usually six to twelve inches in

The combined characteristics of the
workshop and hearth are to be found in
the camp, and, in addition, other
characteristics. However, the camp is
essentially a high land site, well above
flood water levels. Such sites are
ordinarily found on land fairly free from
loose stones, with a gentle slope and near
permanent water. Frequently they are
located on the north side of a stream course
with a higher rise to the rear.
The site here described is located
thirteen and one-half miles north of
Abilene on the south bank of the Clear
Fork of the Brazos and 100 feet above
its bed. It extends for a quarter of a mile
along the top bank of the stream, to end
at both the east and west extremities in
deep gulches draining into the Clear
Fork. Along the south, and half a mile
away, is the crest of a gentle ridge. With
the exception of this crest and a still
higher point along the banks of the Clear
Fork to the northeast, this site is on the
highest ground within many miles.
On the surface have been picked up
fragments of large, thin leaf blades,
blades of a rougher type, whole
projectile points, fragmentary
specialized implements, whole leaf
blades, grinding stones, spokeshaves,
rubbing stones, knives, hand axes,

Above, hillside covered with flint fragments, many of
which have been worked; below, prehistoric workshop.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

29

thickness and occur ordinarily on the sides of slopes course of this and adjacent streams, burned rock
near stream courses.
mounds have been noted. From surface indications,
A distinctive type of small keel backed scraper these are built of stones from the size of a doubled
is found in a few of this type of site. Pottery has fist and less, in combination with soil that has the
also been found associated with these large hearths. appearance of having been burned. Some mussel
shells appear on the surface.
Mounds
The mounds observed are eighteen inches to two
In the Jim Ned Valley, commencing twenty-five feet high, ten to thirty feet across and are practically
miles southeast of Abilene and extending along the level on top, with fairly steep sides. They are all
circular.
Artifacts are not numerous in
association with these mounds, but in
general correspond to those found in
campsites.
Burial
One and one-half miles North of the
camp just described and 150 feet above
the bed of the Clear Fork is the location of
a reported grave. It is on a shoulder of land
reaching out toward the west from the
highest point of this ridge and overlooks
the river and a vast scope of country to the
North, West and South. Like the majority
of recorded graves, it has long ago been
dug into.
Other sites of graves have been reported
in locations similar to that described for
the Edwards Plateau remnant quarry and
also on high points in the calcareous hills.
A different type of burial is suggested in
the description of the sandy land types.
The burial now reported was evidently
in the form of a low mound of loose stones,
four to six feet in diameter and perhaps
two feet high, built up from rocks the size
of a man’s head and larger. This grave has
the inner stones thrown out, forming a
circular indentation three feet across and
reaching down to the soil.

A typical small hearth. Above, before excavation;
below, after excavation.

The majority of all reported burial sites
are located upon the high points of land,
from which a far view may be obtained in
at least three directions.

30

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Paint Mine

Two miles south of Lawn and on the west side
of the Santa Fe Railroad is a ridge extending in a
general south and north direction, 150 feet above
the bed of Jim Ned Creek immediately east of Lawn.
Several strata of limestone at different levels form
encircling shelves where they outcrop on the slopes.
At intervals in the stratum near the crest of the ridge
are many depressions in depth ranging from a foot
to more than eight feet. Some of them are thirty feet
across.
Close to these excavations are small areas of
fairly level ground with many groups of loose
ledgelike limestones. The blocks of stone forming
these groups are ordinarily a square foot in size
and range in thickness from two to five inches.
Imbedded in this stone is oxide of iron.
Associated with the groups of limestone and in
and about the excavations are numerous scrapers,
small rough blades, fragmentary implements, and
knives.
Material from this mine has been carried in all
directions to camp sites within several miles of it.
In numbers of the nearby camps, it is a distinct
characteristic.
This site was first identified as a prehistoric
paint mine by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray.
Camp
(Sandy Land)
This type is located in loose, fine sand,
containing a few scattered nodules of quartz and
chert or flint. Such soil is highly retentive of
moisture. The surface is hummocky and where
subject to wind action, distinct dunes of no mean
dimensions have been built up. This is the case
where the land has long been under cultivation, as
vegetation seems to retard the shifting of the surface.

consequence, and at this point it is only a wet
weather drainage. One-half mile to the southeast is
a large spring. There is now a spring with a very
light flow upon the side of the hill on which this
site is located. Water is also near the surface at
various points around the base of the ridge as
indicated by dense growths of black willow in a
number of places.
The artifacts that are found on the surface of this
type of site are decidedly different from those that
are associated with other camp sites. Of the twentynine sites of this type that have been inspected, only
nine scrapers have been recorded, while on the hard
land sites, this tool is one of the most numerous of
the completed implements found. The specialized
implements in connection with this type of camp
are of a finer finish than the corresponding artifacts
from other sites. This type of site is particularly
characterized by the extremely artistic workmanship
and designs that prevail with the small points.
Camps of the character just described frequently
are located on the crests or slopes of gentle rises.
Water supply in any form is not usually apparent
close by. In addition to points and knives there are
great numbers of flint chips and burned stones. Also,
in the majority of this type of camp are to be found
great quantities of fragmentary mussel shells, even
though the location is several miles from the nearest
stream. In several of the sites have been found
fragmentary human cranial bones, as well as many
bones of large animals, similar to buffalo.
The metate and muller (or manos) are usually to
be found in the sandy land sites.
Gravel Pits
Fragmentary remains of extinct forms of animals
and worked flint have been reported from pits
located in the vicinity of Hamby, Potosi, Caps Road
and Buffalo Gap.

To sum up. At least eleven types of sites are
classified in the area covered. All but one of the
types are represented by three or more individual
sites, fairly well scattered, but each site is located
topographically similar to all other sites of the same
type. There is little difference in artifacts recorded
The location of this site is four and one-fifth in sites of the same type, but a wide one between
miles from Lytle creek, the nearest stream of any the type themselves.
The site of this type of camp is located fourteen
miles Southeast of Abilene on the Walden farm. A
distinct ridge extends in a northeasterlysouthwesterly direction for a mile. The crest of the
ridge is fifty feet higher than the surrounding country.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

31

NOTES ON SOME TEXAS COAST CAMPSITES
AND OTHER REMAINS
GEORGE CASTOR MARTIN
The territory covered by this article was part of
the lands claimed by and occupied by a tribe known
to the Mexicans as Carancahuas and to the white
settlers as Karankawas, sometimes abbreviated to
Karonks, a race of anthropophagists distinct in
language, appearance and customs from their
neighbors. All authorities agree that the Karankawas
were an extremely cruel, fierce, warlike race. They
were never conquered, and with the exception of a
few remnants of the tribe which drifted into Mexico,
were gradually exterminated by the white settlers.
The Karankawa were a tribe of hunters and
fishermen deriving their sustenance from the bays
and shores, supplementing a fish, shellfish, and bird
diet with human flesh, berries and roots, and with
occasional bison the bones of which are found in
their campsites. They seldom left the edge of the
waters, and with the exception of three sites on hills,
these not over one-half mile inland, all discovered
sites in the territory covered by this article are
immediately at the water’s edge. They chose high
land, higher than that surrounding it, for both
occasional camps and for those visited frequently,
and such being almost always at the water’s edge
erosion is constantly taking place, which will, in a
few years, entirely wipe out the last traces of their
occupancy. Some sites have already been
obliterated, and others are almost gone. In witness
of the latter class are two large campsites, one on
Rattlesnake Point, Live Oak Peninsula, near
Rockport, where Copano Bay has gradually
undermined the bluff at the rate of several feet
yearly; the other a chain of islands in the Laguna
Madre, where human skeletons in fragments litter
the bottom of the bay for a distance of about seventy
five feet or more from the present shore, dropped
there as the islands wore away. Some complete
skulls have been exhumed here, dug up from beneath
the water of the bay. All fragmentary pieces of
skulls found here and examined by the writer show
absolute lack of forehead.

A complete skull examined by Mr. Henry Fulton
of Corpus Christi, was reported by him as being
perfectly flat and not rising above the level of the
eyebrows. This brought the eyes almost level with
the top of the head. On Matagorda Island, on the
Gulf side, is a campsite and burial ground where
the wind frequently exposes skeletons in place and
then recovers them. At this site Mr. George
McLester of Rockport, found twelve skeletons
exposed.
All local sites are littered with the remains of
shellfish, notable among which are oysters, several
varieties of clams, conchs, snails or slugs, and saltwater mussels. The conchs, in some cases, show
direct contact with fire, the entire shell being broken
into fragments, while others show a hole broken
through the side by means of which the occupant
was killed so that it might be removed. On the
islands mentioned, and on a much eroded camp and
burial site on the west side of the Callo del Oso, a
branch of Corpus Christi Bay, the writer recently
examined thousands of these conch shells with holes
broken into them. They lay in heaps every few
yards mingled with human bones, oyster and clam
shells. This site is about one mile in length, one
immense burial and camp ground.
Possibly this is the site of one of the “lost”
missions, as a stick of incense was found here by
Mr. Henry Fulton (it was afterward burned by a
priest), and here Mr. John B. Dunn of Corpus
Christi, while excavating a grave, found a pipe and
a silver sword hilt of Mexican workmanship heavily
embossed with Aztec figures—a handsome piece
of work.
“Workshops,” or sites where there are large
accumulations of flakes and chips are almost
unknown. Only one site which might be styled a
“workshop” exists, and that one is the most northerly
of the string of islands before mentioned as lying in
the Laguna Madre. In this case the entire island is
literally covered with broken pebbles, flakes and

32

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Shells, beads, clay ornaments and bone awls from Texas coast tribes.
chips mingled with potsherds. No flint deposits
exist near any of the sites covered by this article,
all crude material for artifacts necessarily being
carried for a long distance, and the refuse shows
that all flint was brought in in pebble form, none
quarried. A very moderate number of chips are
found on the camp sites, but almost anywhere along
the bay shores are found spots where one or more
arrowheads have been made, showing that hunters
frequently carried the crude pebbles with them and
flaked out arrowheads as required. This system of
manufacturing emergency points evidently accounts
for many of the very crude triangular arrowheads
found along the bay shores. The coast tribes made
some exceedingly beautiful and delicate bird-points
and some large arrowheads of fine workmanship,
but mingled with these are the rough triangular
specimens mentioned above. Reworking of broken

artifacts was frequently practiced, some well
covered with patina, elsewhere being almost free
of it near the point and edges.
On a small eminence on St. Charles Bay the writer
found the site where three tepees had been set up
for probably one day’s time. Just enough erosion
had taken place to expose three heaps of oyster
shells, about fifty oysters to each tepee, the piles
about twenty feet apart. Close to one heap of shell
lay a perfect bird-point, barbed, and with a very
long and slender neck, and not far from it the two
parts of a broken arrowhead of triangular shape
surrounded by all the flakes and chips which had
composed the original flint pebble from which it
had been made. Another place where tepee sites
were completely bared by erosion was on a small
island in the Playa Lodosa, an arm of Copano Bay.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Here the tent sites were in a row, ten or twelve feet
apart. The floor spaces had been completely
covered with shells mingled with potsherds, and
among these were found several bird-points and
larger arrowheads. It was on one of these shell
floorings that the writer found a very fine pottery
disc, a perfectly round flat piece ground out of a
shard. Mr. Thomas Newman of the Saunders ranch,
found two similar discs at a campsite not far from
this island, and threw them away. He also found a
very fine spearhead near the same site, now in the
collection of the writer. Another disc made from a
sherd was found on the south bank of the Nueces
River, near Viola.
Kitchen Remains
Oyster, clam, conch, mussel and sea snail shells,
bones and teeth of many varieties of fish, and the
same remains of bison, deer, raccoons, o’possums,
peccaries (javelina), coyotes, lobos (wolves), and
bones of all the shore birds, and shell and bones of
several varieties of water turtles and land tortoises.
“Stones” from the heads of catfish only are lacking
among the remains of fish. It is evident this species
was not eaten. Gatschet says porpoises were not
hunted by the Karankawa, but their teeth appear on
one campsite.

33

near Rockport. This specimen is of orange colored
flint shaded with darker red, is five inches long
and two and one-half inches wide at the cutting edge.
The other is in the collection of Mr. John B. Dunn
of Corpus Christi, found on Padre Island, and is of
very unusual shape.
Fetishes
Several natural formations of flint and limestone
were found on the Rincon Ranch. One was shaped
like an elephant, another like a face in profile,
features oriental, etc. Neither material is native
and these objects must have been carried to the
place of discovery. Two small pieces of baked
clay, each painted with asphalt over a little over
half of their surfaces, were found on a campsite
near Bayside on Copano Bay. Another specimen,
almost a replica of these, was found on Infierno
Creek, Baffin Bay, near Caroline Beach. They were
probably of fetish use.
Incised Stones

A ceremonial stone of curious shape and
unknown use, of flint, carved, ground and polished,
not chipped, decorated with deeply incised lines,
was found on Salt Lake, near Corpus Christi, by
Mexican boys hunting arrowheads. A pendant (?)
of similar workmanship was found at the same time.
The latter is of a yellowish-brown stone, not flint,
Human Remains
Five burial grounds of fairly large size are and is decorated on both sides with incised line
designs. The flint specimen has a glossy glazed
known, four others of undetermined size have been
appearance acquired only with great age, the other
located. Interment was at slight depth, bodies being
specimen is dull in finish.
covered with a foot, or little more, of earth. No
stone artifacts or pottery were interred with the
The Peabody Museum, Cambridge,
bodies. A conch shell spoon (or pendant), pierced Massachusetts, reports that similar incised
at one end was found among some human bones specimens are unknown in the United States, but
which had been thrown out of a grave on the Callo are occasionally found in the West Indies. Mr. A.
del Oso, and this with the pipe and sword hilt E. Anderson of Brownsville, reports a celt, much
previously mentioned are the only actual grave finds battered and chipped, with incised line decoration.
known to the writer. Places of interment were in A pebble of black stone found on one of the Laguna
Madre islands has a single incised line around it in
and part of the campsites.
a manner suggesting the phallus.
Flint Hatchets or Tomahawks
Pendants
Only two specimens are known, one in the
A bone or ivory pendant was reported as found
collection of the writer, ploughed up from the bottom
of a drained lake on the farm of Mr. J. E. Dewitt, on an island in the Laguna Madre, but in bad

34

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

condition. This crumbled when dry and its parts
became lost. An oyster shell roughly rubbed into
pendant shape and bored through the narrow end
was found near Rockport on Copano Bay. The
lower part crumbled and could not be preserved,
but the pierced portion is intact and is owned by
the writer. A perfect pendant of clam shell, drilled,
was found on the Callo del Oso. A decorated shell
pendant or spoon was found with bones thrown up
out of a grave on the Oso. It is drilled in the broad
end and is notched along the edges. As it could
have served either purpose its classification is
problematical.

almost equaling them in number. Some of the latter
do not suffer by comparison with the finest Oregon
gem points. Serrated points are common in many
forms.
Spearheads
Spearheads are rare in local territory. About
twenty-five are known, some of crude workmanship,
some very fine.
Knives

These vary from rough spalls slightly worked
to handsomely made and perfect specimens. The
larger sizes are quite rare. Possibly the finest
Wampum and Beads
A single shell disc thirteen Mm. in diameter, specimen found anywhere in Texas, however, was
drilled through the center, was found on the shore picked up on the Edgar Barber farm on Puerto
of Copano Bay. Panama shells, the tips of the spirals Bay. It is lance shaped with straight base,
rubbed off so that they might be strung, are found measures eight and seven-eighths inches in length,
on many campsites, others, treated in the same and exactly two inches in its extreme width. At
manner at the ends of the shell, have been sawed in no portion does it exceed a silver half-dollar in
half, each half pierced through the lip so that they thickness, and its workmanship is flawless.
might be strung. Such beads, if hung in clusters,
Scrapers
would tinkle with every movement. Other tiny
shells are found pierced for this purpose, the holes
Scrapers are very common and vary from rough
not drilled but made by abrading. Some beads of flakes slightly worked to very handsome artifacts.
Panama shells found on Petronilla (or Santa A common type is about finger length and width,
Petronita) Creek had the ends of the spirals removed worked on both sides, the scraping edge rounded.
and were decorated with incised lines encircling
the shell.
Pestles, Metates, Mortars, Etc.
Fish Spears

Unknown.

Ten are known in collections, of varying shapes,
Axes
but distinctly fish spears. Two are triangular, in
Unknown.
the style of a three-sided file, and are of black flint.
One of these was found on the islands of the Laguna
Pottery
Madre, the other on the shore of San Antonio Bay.
Six are pencil-like in shape and finely worked. One
Sherds are found on most campsites. Seven
from the shore of Copano Bay is of petrified wood. distinct varieties of pottery were made. Arcs of
sherds show the vessels varied from about three
Bird Points
inches in diameter to ten and one-half inches. A
There are over three hundred perfect specimens clumsy heavy cooking ware was made, placed in
in the writer’s collection, and as many more in the direct contact with the fire. A lighter ware also
collections of Messrs. Dunn, Fulton and Sellers of occasionally shows direct contact. Three fire
Corpus Christi. Triangular points predominate, with blackened and cracked stones show that cooking
very beautiful barbed and slender necked points was sometimes done by placing heated stones in

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
the pots. One of these came from the Blackjack
Peninsula, two from an island in the Laguna Madre.
Lighter vessels were also made, some sherds
measuring only two Mm. and three Mm. in
thickness, and these could have been used only as
water containers. The lighter wares are coated,
sometimes inside, sometimes outside, and
occasionally on both sides with a smooth coating
of asphalt, making them absolutely waterproof.
Many sherds show line decoration with black
paint made from asphalt. One variety of pottery,
made of a different paste from that used in the last
described type, is harder and less porus, and
sherds seldom show the use of asphalt. To date
six different types of decorated edges have been
found, one made in the form known in heraldry as
embattled, another as indented, another made by
cutting triangular nicks in the edge about four Mm.
apart, etc. A number of specimens show incised
decorations, lines, dots, and small crescent shaped
indentations. Pots were frequently drilled in sides
for purpose of suspension. The writer believes
the decorative and waterproofing features of these
Texas potters to be unique.
Copper

35

Boat Stones
This type of ceremonial is represented by one
specimen from a site on the Rincon Ranch.
Bone Tools
Two bone awls were found on a site at the end
of the Live Oak Peninsula, two on sites on the Callo
del Oso, and one at the mouth of the Nueces River
near Viola. The latter was found in the same pile
of shells as was a very fine and perfect bone tube.
They were found in very close connection and the
tube may have served as a case for the awl.
Flint Needles
These are not common, neither are they rare.
Possibly a dozen have been found, all very slender
and delicate, and ranging from one to two and onehalf inches in length.
Hammerstones
These are not very common and are usually of
flint, only one specimen in the writer’s collection
being of quartz.

A single ornament or utensil made of sheet
“Tchous” Knives
copper was found on a site on the Rincon Ranch. It
These are not common but several have been
may have been used as a spearhead, but its end is
found, usually of red quartzite.
rounded, not pointed. A tiny bird-point cut out of
sheet copper was found on a campsite on Puerto
Articles of Glass
Bay.
Objects of glass are not common, though broken
bottles
of green glass are found on many of the
Digging Tools
campsites. Three bird-points of broken bottleAre represented by oyster shells pierced with
glass, and one arrowhead of larger size have been
either round or square holes through which a handle
found to date, as well as one broken artifact of the
was thrust. Occasional sections of conch shells
same material, use unknown.
were also used to dig with, while complete conch
shells of large size have holes in them made to
accommodate a handle.

36

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

THE CULTURE OF THE COMANCHE INDIANS
RUPERT RICHARDSON
The purpose of this paper is to describe the
manners, customs, social and political institutions,
and the state of mental development of the Comanche
Indians, together with some notice of their
implements, weapons, camp sites, and means of
subsistence. Because of the nature of the information
available it has been necessary to place the
emphasis on the more intangible matters rather than
on artifacts and other concrete remains which might
interest the members of this society more. Indeed,
the writer fears that what he brings will be of little
value to a society created primarily for the purpose
of gathering, classifying and studying the bones,
utensils, and implements of the aborigines of this
section and less concerned with Indian relations
and the thought, habits and customs of the races that
preceded us.
The Comanches are not aborigines of this
immediate section. In fact, they had for some time
been in contact with the French on the east and
southeast and the Spanish on the west and southwest
before they began to frequent any part of Texas.
However, for a century and a half they did claim as
their home a great part of that region which we
designate with the indefinite term West Texas; and
the tribal name will forever be linked with the
border tragedy, history and romance of this region.
Although the purpose of this paper is not to deal
with Indian relations, some notice of the general
Indian situation in West Texas during the Spanish
period may well serve as an introduction to a more
specific study of the Comanches. When Coronado
came, in 1541, he probably found Apache bands in
this region.1 As he moved into Kansas he met with
tribes of the great Caddoan family, and the people
of Quivira, that city of gold that turned to clay and
grass when he at last found it, are identifiable with
the Wichitas who belonged to that family. Although
the great “conqueror” did not visit eastern and
central Texas, it is reasonably certain that many
Caddoan bands lived there also. After Coronado,

various other Spanish explorers visited the high
plains of Texas and the prairie country to the east,
but the records they have left do not add greatly to
our knowledge of the natives of the region. During
the Seventeenth Century the upper Colorado and
Concho region became especially well known to
the Spanish since adventurers were attracted there
by the pearls found in the mussels so plentiful in
those streams. They found the Jumano Indian
(probably a band of the Wichitas) in this region,
who were mortal enemies of their neighbors the
Apaches. Naturally the Jumano welcomed the
Spanish as possible allies. The prospects of pearls
appealed to Governor Cruzate of New Mexico just
as the promise of a harvest of souls struck the
imagination of Fray Nicolas Lopez, Custodian of
Missions. Hence, in 1684-’85, a party of priests
and soldiers established a temporary mission among
the Jumano near modern Ballinger. Here, according
to their chronicle, the Spanish and their Indian allies
killed for a certain feast four thousand buffaloes.
Although the Spanish had erected a crude building
and planted crops the mission was soon abandoned
because of conditions and circumstances that need
not concern us in this paper.2 However, it is
significant that at this time Caddoan bands were to
be found in the Abilene country, in the midst of the
more nomadic Athapascans. Our section was
border-land between the nomadic tribes of the
plains country and the more sedentary Indians of
central Texas, who raised gardens and built large
and comparatively substantial grass lodges. Camp
sites now being discovered and examined by
members of this society confirm this fact. A few
days ago at a point a few miles south of Abilene,
Dr. Ray pointed out to me certain camp sites on or
near loose soil well suited for the crude system of
Indian farming. Here we found large fire circles
and pieces of metates for grinding corn, indicative
of the more permanent camp sites of the agricultural
Indians; but at another site near by (although it may
have been occupied many decades later or earlier),

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

37

small piles of fire-stones scattered closely over a extensively on the chase for subsistence and were
narrow valley, indicate that here, for a short while, fiercer and more nomadic than their other Caddoan
a more nomadic people lived.
kinsmen. On a framework of poles, sometimes fifty
feet in diameter, they constructed comfortable grass
Early in the Eighteenth Century both the Spanish
lodges, the whole when completed looked
and the French came to know more about the Indians
somewhat like a giant bee hive of the old fashion.
of Texas and their accounts are much easier to
They raised crops of corn, pumpkins and possibly
interpret. During this century there was a southward
tobacco. On the other hand the Apaches practiced
shift among the more nomadic tribes in what is now
agriculture only to a limited extent and commonly
eastern Colorado and New Mexico and western
lived in crude brush lodges. Although they had but
Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas. The Osages, in the
few arts their women were skilled basket makers.6
northeast,3 tended to drive the Wichitas south.
In contradistinction to these other tribes, the
Furthermore, at about the opening of the century,
Comanches, like their allies the Kiowas, never
the Comanches, who were probably being crowded
planted seed of any kind. Thus the Caddoan,
by the Cheyennes, came from the north into eastern
Shoshonean, and Athapascan families have all been
New Mexico and the Panhandle of Texas. Here they
represented in the Abilene country at one time or
clashed with the Apache tribes and Indian tradition
another. It seems that the Wichitas and Apaches were
tells of a terrible nine days’ battle fought between
here from time immemorial, but the Comanches were
the Comanches and the Lipan-Apaches on the Rio
late comers. The stone artifacts we find in this
del Fierro, (River of Iron), which Bolton identifies
country may have belonged to the Wichitas or
as the Wichita.4 The Apaches were forced to give
Lipans; but it is not likely that any stone implement
way and retreat towards the west and south. The
found here, excepting perhaps stone hammers and
Comanches continued this southward migration and,
clubs, were ever used by the Comanches. Long
in 1758, they and their allies, the Wichitas,
before the latter tribe had reached this country, iron,
Hasinaies, and probably some of the Caddo tribe
steel, tin and copper had pretty well supplanted the
proper attacked the Franciscan mission on the San
stone and bone implements used by their forbears.
Saba, near the present site of Menard, and killed
Naturally this improvement in implements, together
two of the friars and several other Spaniards.
with the introduction of the horse worked some
Thenceforth the Comanches claimed as their home
transformation among them; but we cannot follow
the country as far south as the San Saba, and, indeed,
this out because we know practically nothing of
during the years that followed they occupied at one
their culture before they came in touch with a higher
time or another most of the country as far south as
civilization.
Bexar. In his map of Texas in the eighteenth century,
In physical appearance there was little to
Bolton shows the Indian situation in the western
half of Texas as follows: The Apaches occupy the distinguish the Comanche from his fellow plains
region northwest of the Camino Real, which ran savages of other tribes. The artist Catlin described
from the Presidio del Rio Grande to Bexar, with the race as “in statue rather low, and in person,
the Lipan-Apache extending as a kind of protruding often approaching to corpulency”; and stated that
finger eastward into the country around the present they were not as large and handsome as the Kiowas.
Mason; north of the Apaches are the Comanche He added that, “In their movements they were heavy
tribes and east of these, divided by about the ninety- and ungraceful; and on their feet one of the most
eighth meridian, were the Wichitas.5 It would not unattractive and slovenly-looking races of Indians
do violence to the facts to state that the West Texas that I have ever seen.” But the mounted Comanche
Indian situation remained thus until the Indians were presented an entirely different appearance. Once
displaced by white settlers.
on his horse, he continued, “He gracefully flies away
like a different being.”7 Some twenty years later,
It has already been stated that the Wichitas were
about 1854, Captain R. B. Marcy, of the United
an agricultural people, although they relied
States Army, described the men as of “About the

38

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

medium statue, with bright copper-colored
complexions and intelligent countenances, in many
instances with aquiline noses, thin lips, black eyes
and hair, with but little beard.”8 However, it should
be remembered that there had been some Mexican
admixture with the Comanche blood even as early
as Catlin’s time. All accounts agree that the women
were generally low of stature, ugly and repulsive
in appearance.

four long eagle’s feathers, two on each
side. To the center was attached his
buffalo hair plait, studded, at intervals of
an inch or two, with enormous silver
medallions, of an oval shape, and at least
four inches in largest diameter. This plait
swept the ground, and he seemed to set
great store by it, as nothing would induce
him to part with one of the ornaments. A
rifle and bow, quiver and arrows,
completed his costume and equipments;
but being slender in figure and short in
stature, his appearance was not at all
imposing.

The men wore their hair long and generally
ornamented it profusely, while the women cropped
their hair close to the head. A Comanche dandy was
most fastidious about his appearance and spent
much time in the preparation of his toilet, especially
if he was about to enter the presence of strangers.
In contrast to Naroni other Indians are described:
He did not shave, but instead, plucked his face clean “Straightfellow was very miserably clad, dirty and
of its scant growth of beard; and sometimes he also ragged, with a very forbidding countenance,
pulled out his eyebrows.9
indicative of cunning and cruelty.” While the
women impressed the writer as being “Ugly,
The dress of the men consisted of leggins and
crooked-legged, stoop-shouldered, squalid and
moccasins, a breech cloth or flap, and a buffalo
dirty, with haggard and prematurely old
robe thrown over the shoulders if the weather was
countenances, their hair cropped close to their
cold. Catlin’s picture of a chief’s children, made
heads, and with scarce a rag to cover their
near Red River in 1834, shows the younger children
nakedness.11
naked, while the larger girls were comfortably and
decently clad in buckskin, including moccasins,
The wonderful physical stamina of the American
leggings, and a slip or dress with sleeves extending Indian has often been commented upon by enthusiastic
to the elbows and skirts well below the knees. writers who have been wont to contrast their rugged
Naturally there were many variations in dress and physiques and powers of endurance with
the buffalo and buck-skin were gradually supplanted corresponding qualities in the softer and more effete
by cloth and blankets secured from traders.10
civilized people. Doubtless nature, manifesting
herself in the harsh environment of the plains country,
A combination of the savages and civilized in
mercilessly worked towards the elimination of
dress sometimes produced ludicrous results. A
weaker individuals so that those who survived to
description of a prominent Comanche as he rode
the age of maturity were generally sound. However
into camp on the Clear Fork, in Shackelford County,
that may be, it is certain that the Comanches had lost
in 1854, runs thus:
this physical superiority (if, indeed, they ever had
it) by the time they had completed their southward
Naroni rode in grand costume. He wore
migration. The fecundity of the women was low for
an old blue military coat, with tarnished
epaulettes, and covered with bullet
a savage people, death of the mother at child-birth
was not uncommon, and rheumatism caused much
buttons, a wampum necklace, almost equal
to a breast-plate, numerous ear-rings,
suffering. Diseases brought by white intruders, such
as Cholera, Smallpox and syphilis swept away many
finger-rings, and a large ring in his nose,
completely encircling his mouth, and
of the savages.12 For smallpox they had no remedy
bright red leggins.
other than the sweat bath followed by the cold plunge.
But his crowning glory was his head dress.
From the crown of his head started out

The Comanche tipi represented a wonderful
combination of utility and portability. A dozen or

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
more slender poles were tied together at the top
and set up so as to form the frame-work of an
irregular cone of such diameter as the material at
hand and the size of the family made practicable.
This framework was covered with buffalo hides,
flesh side out, and offered excellent shelter, while
an opening and flap at the top assured ventilation.
The flap could always be adjusted so that the
opening was protected from the prevailing wind
on the same principle that ventilators on our modern
buildings are constructed so as to shift with the
wind. Recently the writer spent a hot August evening
in a Comanche tipi constructed along traditional
lines except that canvas rather buffalo hides served
for covering. There was no smoke and the place
was comfortably cool, notwithstanding the small
fire in the center. Close examination revealed the
fact that the covering was not drawn completely to
the ground, but that instead an air space of several
inches was left all around. This, together with the
opening at the top, made for perfect ventilation. Had
the night been cold, the canvas could have been
drawn completely to the ground, thus sacrificing
ventilation to comfort.
The Comanches were a nomadic people and as
late as 1850 a wandering band might be found in
the valley of the Platte or in the plains of Durango,
fifteen hundred miles further south. There was not
a single Comanche tribe, but rather several distinct
tribes, having but few relations the one with the
other. The Penatekas, were the southernmost band
or tribe and are most often heard of in the history of
Texas. Occasionally they got in touch with the
northern bands when the latter came down to the
Brazos or Clear Fork to spend the winter or when
some of the young men of the different bands, joined
perhaps by their allies the Kiowas, put out for the
Mexican border for a joint raid. Sometimes the
Penatekas were even in a state of war with their
northern kinsmen. Naturally when the chiefs of a
given band made a treaty it was binding only on
their immediate followers. Hence, their kinsmen
who lived afar off were likely to ignore it even if
they should hear of it. Furthermore, the nomadic
habits of the Indians and the resultant divisions and
subdivisions of the bands into small parties away
from responsible leaders made it impossible for

39

the chiefs to control their own men. It is safe to say
that the wild Comanches never kept a treaty and in
the matter of treaty breaking some excellent
examples were set by their white neighbors.13
The records available—and they are exceedingly
scant and unsatisfactory—indicate that the political
institutions of the Comanches were meager and
poorly defined. Each band had a head civil chief
and a head war chief, selected by the council of
chiefs and leading men. In this connection I may
state that I have never seen any satisfactory account
of the manner in which chiefs were selected, or
any definition of just what constituted a chief. It
appears that heredity was one consideration but not
the only matter of determining the status of a man in
the tribe. Absolutism and the idea of divine right
found little consideration in a Comanche camp. The
chief or head man who proved tactless, cowardly,
or inefficient would soon be supplanted; but this
readjustment would likely take place gradually and
by common consent rather than by formal procedure.
In all matters, even war, the head civil chief was
superior to his war chief, but if the civil chief was
aged and decrepit and the war chief vigorous and
popular this civil superiority would be more
theoretical than real. Verily, among the Comanches
the man made the office and not the office the man.
However, the war chief was apt to be the son,
natural or adopted, of the head civil chief; and the
most insolent Comanche brave had respect for the
council of his elders.14
In theory, at least, the council was supreme, but
its decisions were often indefinite and left each
chief or head man a large measure of freedom of
action. Generally the majority made little effort to
impose its will on the minority.
During the later period, custom and the consensus
of opinion, public opinion, we might call it, were
practically the only sanctions behind Comanche law.
However, it is likely that before the tribe became
demoralized through contact with the white race
and the desperate struggle for existence this brought
about, the chiefs exercised more authority.15 Cases
of the formal arraignment and trial of a warrior or
chief, were exceedingly rare, if such ever occurred;

40

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

for the writer has never discovered a well
authenticated record of such a procedure. A chief
or leading brave might lash a boy or woman, but to
strike another brave or chief generally meant a feud
or civil war. Differences between tribesmen were
settled by those directly concerned or by the
relatives of the slain party. Of course, the law of an
eye for an eye prevailed, but generally the heart of
the offended party could be softened by judicious
gifts. Generally the chiefs could make the men
behave while they were in their presence and most
men followed the admonition of their elders and
leaders as a matter of course.

In seasons of plenty the squaws boned and split
the meat, carved it into long chains, and threw it
over poles to dry in the sun. Meat intended for
immediate consumption was dried or cooked over
a fire.
Naturally the Comanche women were adepts at
tanning hides. The tanning of a deer skin is described
thus:
Having soaked the skins thoroughly, then
throw them over a smooth log leaned
against a tree at an angle, and then taking
a rib of a deer in both hands, remove the
hair by scraping it against the grain; they
then stretched and dried them, when they
became beautifully soft and white. To
color them, they tied several into chimney
shape, hung to a limb, and building
smoulder fires under them they soon
changed to a yellowish brown on the hair
side, and light yellow on the flesh side.18

Polygamy was common, but before the advent
of the white race and its demoralizing influence on
the savages the chastity of Comanche women rated
high. During the period of Anglo-American relations
it was not uncommon for a woman to run away from
her husband in company with a spouse more to her
liking. Traditional Comanche law provided that in
such cases the offended husband might punish the
woman by cutting off her nose, but this horrible
A somewhat different account is given by another
practice was not always followed. In at least some observer. He states that:
cases the husband took back his erring spouse and
The skins were first staked down to the
rejoiced in his good fortune at being able to recover
ground, flesh side up. With a sharp bone
her.
the squaw then scraped off every particle
For sustenance the Comanches depended almost
of flesh; next the scraped surface was
entirely on game, particularly the buffalo. These
spread with lime to absorb the grease, after
animals were generally hunted on horseback and
which the surface was spread with the
brought down with the lance or shot with arrows at
brains of the animal, rubbing it in and
close range. Dependable authorities state that at
working it over till the skin became soft
times the Indians would drive the arrows
and pliable, the process requiring days and
completely through the carcass of the animal.16 The
days of hard work.19
natural tendency was for the bands to follow the
All authorities agree that the Comanches were
buffaloes in their northward and southward
unexcelled as horsemen. Catlin was amazed at their
migration, which practice made a sedentary
trick of dropping their body upon the side of the
existence impossible. At certain seasons, when the
horse thus making of the animal a perfect screen
animals were fat, the hunt became a tribal affair
between themselves and an imaginary enemy. “In
and the slaughter of the great beasts took the shape
this wonderful condition,” he relates, “he will hang
of a cooperative undertaking. Generally the men
whilst his horse is at fullest speed, carrying with
did the killing while the women dressed the
him his bow and his shield, and also long lance of
carcasses, loaded the meat on pack animals, took it
fourteen feet in length, all or either of which he
to camp, and cooked it for immediate use or dried
will wield upon his enemy as he passes; rising and
it as the occasion demanded. Some women were
throwing his arrows over the horses’ back, or with
also hunters of recognized prowess.17
equal ease and equal success under the horse’s

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
neck.” Finally the artist learned that a partial
explanation of the marvel was in the fact that a short
hair halter was passed under the neck of the horse
and both ends tightly braided into the mane on the
withers. Through this loop the young warrior ran
his arm and thus secured an anchor and rest for the
fore part of his body.20
Horses were naturally the only form of wealth
available to the Comanches. They were both useful
and easily moved and an Indian’s wealth was
measured by the number of horses he possessed.
Their horses were of good, indifferent or poor
quality, depending on the success a given band had
had in recruiting their scrubby mustang herds with
better bred animals taken from the Mexican or
Anglo-American frontier. With these Indians horsestealing was both a science and an art and no
warrior’s training was complete until he was
proficient in this respect. At the camp on the Clear
Fork, in 1854, previously referred to, one warrior
carried a shield “Ornamented with a human scalp,
a grizzly bear’s claw and a mule’s tail, significant
of the brave warrior and successful hunter and horsethief.”21 Chief Is-sa-keep, of a band of northern
Comanches, once told Captain Marcy that his four
sons were as fine young men as could be found,
that they were a great comfort to him in his old age,
“and could steal more horses than any other young
men in his band.”22 The brave’s best horse was
always saved for the hunt or war party and the Indian
had that love for their favorite steed that always
characterizes good horsemen.

41

warriors, depending on the circumstances. The chief
or head man who wished to lead off a war party
paraded through the camp, carrying in some cases
a long pole with a red flag tipped with eagle’s
feathers, chanting a war song. If he was a popular
leader and the bands was in a war mood, or if he
could convince the young braves that his enterprise
promised large returns by way of scalps, prisoners
and booty, he would soon collect about him many
warriors. War dances would be held, the leading
men would make talks, runners would be sent to
other bands and the expedition would take on large
proportions. No warrior was obliged to join, but
the young man who always stayed at camp would
obviously soon become the object of much ridicule.
However, the tribe was not entirely at the mercy of
these young hot-spurs. If the expedition was likely
to result in the flagrant violation of a popular treaty
or if it was calculated to bring down upon the tribe
the wrath of a powerful enemy, a more conservative
sentiment would prevail and the movement would
be nipped in the bud.
In this connection some description of Comanche
weapons should be given. Although they acquired
a few guns from white traders at a very early date,
primitive weapons were all that a great majority of
the tribesmen had as late as the middle of the
nineteenth century. Their bows were of bois d’arc,
rather short for long bows, being ordinarily not
more than three feet in length. Sometimes they were
wrapped with the sinew of the deer, and the bow
string was of the same material. Their arrows were
about twenty inches long, of flexible wood, with a
triangular spike, or point, of iron. Two feathers
intersecting each other at right angles were bound
to the other extremity of the arrow and served to
guide it. They frequently carried lances, one of
which is described as “a piece of steel, about two
feet and a half long and an inch wide, tapering to a
point, fixed into a slender handle of bois d’arc, the
whole weapon being about seven feet in length.

As is the case among most savage peoples, war
was a normal condition with the Comanches. For
instance if expediency dictated that there be peace
between the Comanches and Osages, the Texas border
was still inviting and there the braves could find horses
to steal and ranches to plunder; if there must be peace
with Texas, there was at least one happy war ground,
which according to Comanche ethics, was always a
legitimate field of operation. That was Mexico. And
The Comanche shields were described as being
hither the young braves would go, notwithstanding the
more or less perfunctory efforts of the governments of circular in form, about two feet in diameter, and
made of wicker work covered with two thicknesses
the United States and Texas to stop them.
of Buffalo hide. Between the coverings of buffalo
War with the Comanches might call forth united
hide was a padding of hair about an inch thick. With
tribal effort or it might concern but a small party of

42

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

the advent of the rifle the Indians probably
reinforced their shields. At any rate the tough buffalo
hide covering, turned flesh side out and polished
as much as possible, would turn a rifle ball unless
it struck it perpendicular to the surface.
Long after they had become acquainted with
metal implements the Comanches continued to use
a war club made by binding a withe around a hard
stone of about two pounds in weight. A groove
around the stone helped to keep it in place. The
handle was about fourteen inches long. No doubt
the Indians often put this stone to various uses such
as driving stakes.

We have the account of a similar occurrence which
happened many years later when the son of chief
Pah-hau-ca, of the Southern Comanches, died or
was killed and the chief abandoned his camp and
chattels and moved far north to a new camp.26 The
Comanches would fight desperately to rescue the
body of a fallen comrade so long as the scalp was
intact: but the moment this was removed they would
abandon the body and would not even touch it to
bury it. According to some accounts they also held
the heart of an animal in veneration and generally
avoided touching it when dressing a carcass.27

In literature and art the attainments of the
Comanches were slight. They had no system of
Very little is known about the religion of the wild
writing other than that of crude pictures and these
Comanches. Their religious conceptions were
commonly pertained to wars and the chase. On skins
evidently vague and they had comparatively few well
carefully dressed, they often drew designs, a
established customs of religious meaning. One
common one being the sun in the center with different
observer credits them with acknowledging a supreme
colored rays of light radiating out in finely drawn
ruler and director, whom they called the great spirit,
lines. Their shields were generally adorned with
and with worshipping the sun as the great cause of life
pictures and it may be that they, like their allies the
and the earth as the receptacle and producer of all that
Kiowas, had a system of Heraldry.28 Their paint
sustains life.23 It may well be doubted that they had
was made from colored chalks or clay and their
any conception of a single “Great Spirit,” but their
brushes from tufts of hair. For drawings of a more
veneration for the sun and earth can not be doubted.
temporary character charcoal often served as the
When game was brought down on a hunt the carcass
pencil and any smooth surface like bone, a board,
was immediately prepared and cooked, but no matter
or the bark of a tree served for canvas.29
how hungry the Indian might be, not a bite was eaten
until the chief or leader had cut off a morsel and buried
They had a system of enumeration, but apparently
it. Similarly when the chief lit his pipe the first puff of little or no knowledge of the rudiments of arithmetic.
smoke was blown toward the sun and the second to The moon periods served as time units; but it does
the earth.24
not seem that they had a calendar of any kind, other
than the knowledge of the four seasons. They had
Naturally these savages had many taboos. One
some music, but their repertoire was limited even
or two of these may be mentioned as illustrative,
for savages. Noah Smithwick, who spent several
for they were sometimes matters of great
months with the Comanches about 1837, states that
consequence. In 1787, the Spanish in New Mexico
it was customary for the first fellow who awoke in
tried a colonization experiment with the Comanches
the morning to announce that fact in song; but he
and spent a considerable sum of money building on
thought this was rather a “spontaneous outpouring
the Arkansas a village for a certain band to move
akin to that of the feathered songsters than a religious
into. The Indians moved in, and all went well, until
rite.”30
the wife of a prominent chief died and the whole
band immediately moved out and sought a new
Notwithstanding their lack of culture the
location a great way off. The Spanish officer who Comanches were not a dull people. In native ability
reported this unfortunate occurrence explained that their chiefs were a match for the keenest minds of
these Indians had many superstitions, one being that the white men. Once in a council (the proceedings
when any prominent person died the camp should of which were carefully recorded by a secretary)
be abandoned and the place henceforth avoided.25 President Sam Houston was trying to get the

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Comanches to agree to a line of division between
the country of the Indians and that of their white
neighbors. In the treaty the line was not being
described as the Indians had been told it would be
run. Buffalo Hump, a young Comanche chief,
detected the discrepancy at once and a sharp
argument between him and Houston followed. The
dialogue is too long to be repeated, but one who
reads it will be convinced that the chief knew
exactly what he wanted and why he wanted it. He
knew the topography of the country to perfection
and also the settlements and roads. He clung
persistently to his position and would not be moved
from it.31

43

The Comanches loved tobacco, but eschewed
liquor until the last days of the pre-reservation
period. However, even in this respect they gradually
yielded to the demoralizing influence of the stronger
race and drunkenness was occasionally observed.
The fascination which the vices of the whites had
for the savages is illustrated by an anecdote
Smithwick gives in his memoirs. With chief Maguara
(who was later slain in the Council House fight at
San Antonio) Smithwick had visited Bastrop and
the two were about to return to the Comanche
village. “Juaqua,” said the old chief, addressing
Smithwick by his Comanche name, “hadn’t we
better get a bottle of fool’s water? We might meet
hostile Indians on the road and it would make us
Notwithstanding their many savage vices the
brave.”33
Comanches rated higher morally than other nomadic
tribes. They were hospitable and would share their
last morsel with their guests. In war they gave no
quarter and asked none, but it was not their custom
1. F. W. Hodge, Handbook of American Indians North
to apply slow torture to unfortunate enemies. Of of Mexico, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
course individuals differed widely. Among the Ethnology, Bulletin 30 (Washington, 1907), 1-63.
Southern Comanches, chief Buffalo Hump was
2. A good summary of these Spanish expeditions into West
erratic and sometimes treacherous, but Mo-pe-cho- Texas is given by W. A. Stephenson, in the West Texas
co-pe (Old Owl) was even tempered and altogether Historical Association Yearbook (Abilene, 1926), 11-64dependable. Robert S. Neighbors, long a Texas and 84.
United States Indian agent, knew the Old Owl for a 3. See H. E. Bolton, Athanase De Mezieres and the
number of years and in his reports quotes him again Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780 (Cleveland, 1914),
and again. There is nothing whatever to indicate 1-19, note 2, for the shifting during the eighteenth century.
that Neighbors ever lost confidence in the old savage 4. Ibid., p. 25.
or ever doubted his word.32 There were, no doubt,
many Comanches as honest as the Old Owl, but the 5. De Mezieres, I, Frontispiece.
nomadic habits of the tribe and their loose political 6. For the picture of a Wichita village see George Catlin,
organization made it impossible for the honest North American Indians, Being Letters and Notes on their
Indians to control their less scrupulous brethren and Manners, Customs, and Conditions, written during eight
years’ travel amongst the wildest tribes of Indians in North
the reputation of all suffered because of the acts of America, 1832-1839 (Edinburg, 1926), II, plate 173. On
a few. Furthermore, after about the middle of the the Apaches see Hodge, Handbook. 1, 65-66.
nineteenth century it was almost impossible for the
7. North American Indians, II, 74 and 84.
plains Indians to live by honest means. The inroads
of whites and eastern Indians resulted in the killing 8. Exploration of the Red River of Louisiana, in the
off of their game so that the nomadic savages had year 1852, by R. B. Marcy, Captain Fifth Infantry, United
States Army, assisted by George B. McClellan, Brevet
to either steal or starve. Naturally they chose to Captain, United States Engineers, Washington, 1854 ; 33
steal. Also, the Anglo-American frontiersman had Congress, lst Sess. House Document (not numbered), page
little regard for the Indian’s rights and a thousand 98.
acts of injustice prompted the most horrible 9. Special Report of Surgeon Alex B. Hasson, Fort Phantom
retaliation on the part of the savages.
Hill, 1852, in the Gazette, Austin, 1857.

44

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

10. North American Indians, II, plates 165-172. See,
also, Marcy, as cited 98-99.
11. W. B. Parker, Notes Taken during the Expedition
Commanded by Captain R. B. Marcy, U. S. A., through
Unexplored Texas, in the summer and Fall of 1854
(Philadelphia, 1856), 194.
12. The archives of the Indian office of the Republic of
Texas, at Austin and of the United States Indian Office at
Washington contain references to these diseases too
numerous to cite. Also, the Bexar Archives and the Archivo
General, at the University of Texas and Mexico City
respectively, indicate that during the Spanish Period
smallpox frequently ravaged the Comanche bands. For more
general statements see, The Report of Alex B. Hasson, as
cited and James Mooney, Calendar History of the Kiowa
Indians, Seventeenth Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, 1, 173, 289, 168, 172, 176, 274, 311,
177.
13. The Spaniards often commented on the difficulty of
holding the Comanches to treaties. See The Baron de
Ripperda to the Viceroy, August 25, 1772, in Bolton’s De
Mezieres, as cited, 1, 342. The Anglo-Americans found that
this problem increased with the passing of the years,
14. These statements represent my own opinions based on
extensive reading and study in both Spanish and English
sources. The tribal practices in these matters varied if we
are to reconcile the different conflicting accounts. Josiah
Gregg gives the matter some consideration. See Commerce
of the Prairies (New York, 1845), 306-307, in R. G.
Thwaite’s Early Western Travels, XX, 342-343.

mount their horses and pursue and lasso each a young
antelope which they brought back in triumph to the camp.
Exploration of the Red River, 95.
18. Parker, Notes Taken with Marcy, 198-199.
19. Noah Smithwick, The Evolution of a State,
Recollections of Old Texas Days, Compiled by his
daughter, Nanna Smithwick Donaldson, Austin, Texas (not
dated).
20. North American Indians, II, 73-74.
21. Parker, Notes Taken with Marcy, 195.
22. Exploration of the Red River, 97.
23. Parker. Notes Taken with Marcy, 231.
24. See Noah Smithwick, The Evolution of a State, 180.
Ceremonies preceding the meal similar to this were
common among the plains tribes. See Hodge, 1, 455.
25. Ugarte y Loyola to Don Fernando de la Concha, July
22, 1788, enclosing copies of reports made by the officers
in New Mexico. Ms. Provincias Internas, Mexico City,
Tomo 65, University of Texas Transcripts.
26. Statement of Luis Sanches, interpreter, May 1844; Ms.
Texas Indian Papers, Texas State Library, Austin.
27. Smithwick, The Evolution of a State, 181.
28. See Mooney, Kiowa Calendar, 230.
29. Smithwick, The Evolution of a State, 180-181 ; Dr.
Ferdinand Roemer, Texas (Bonn, 1849) 293 ff.

15. It is Mooney’s opinion that the authority of the Kiowa
chiefs suffered a sharp decline as a result of the advent of
the white race and it is likely that the same thing occurred
among the Comanches. See the Kiowa Indian Calendar,
as cited, 233.

30. The Evolution of a State, 181.

16. See Marcy, Exploration of Red River, as cited, 98.

32. For instance, see Neighbors’ report to Medill, 30
Cong., 1st Session, Senate Executive Document No. 171,
16-25.

17. In Notes Taken With Marcy, Parker tells of one
woman, the widow of the Penateka chief, Santa Anna, who
was said to have killed with her rifle as many as fifteen deer
in one forenoon (pp. 192-193). Captain Marcy tells how he
observed two young Comanche women of a northern band

31. “Minutes of a Grand Council held near the Falls of the
Brazos, between the Republic of Texas and the Indians,
commencing on Monday, October 7th, 1844, Ms. Texas
Indian Papers.

33. The Evolution of a State, 179.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

45

MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY
MRS. R. B. ALVES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- El Paso
PROF. D. W. ARNETT --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
C. W. BARNES ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
C. MAX BAUER -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Amarillo
L. L. BLACKBURN ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Baird
MATTHEWS BLANTON --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
W. F. BRUCE --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Cisco
DR. T. B. BASS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
H. J. BASS -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
ARCH D. BATJER -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
J. H. BEASLEY ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
PROF. H. B. CARROLL ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Lubbock
S. H. CASTEEL ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Midland
MAX BENTLEY ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
JOE E. CHILDERS -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
KENNEDY N. CLAPP -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Lubbock
S. E. B. COCKRELL ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
JUDGE FRED COCKRELL ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
DR. STEWART COOPER -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
COL. M. L. CRIMMINS ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- Ft. Sam Houston
A. B. CROWDER -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
M. A. CLEMENS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
BEN L. COX ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
T. P. DAVIDSON --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
JUDGE E. DOUTHIT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
DR. S. T. DOWDA ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
JOHN B. DUNN -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Corpus Christi
L. M. DROWN ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
RON. W. R. ELY ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
PROF. GEORGE C. ENGERRAND ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Austin
J. B. EUBANK ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Cross Cut
H. T. FLETCHER ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Alpine
G. W. FRY --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
PROF. LEROY C. GLASS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
DR. R. P. GLENN ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
MISS HYBERNIA GRACE --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Anson
R. D. GREEN ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
DR. JOHN C. GRANBERY ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Lubbock
FRANK GRIMES ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
E. L. HARWELL ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
MAJOR JOHN B. HAWLEY -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Fort Worth
DR. T. WADE HEDRICK ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
O. K. HOBBS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
C. A. HOWARD ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Dallas
DR. W. C. HOLDEN ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Lubbock
ED. S. HUGHES ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
J. C. HUNTER ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
C. T. HUTCHINSON ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
EARL INGERSON --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
HENRY JAMES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
W. S. JAMES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
PERCY JONES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene

46

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

W. R. KEEBLE ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
JOE KERR ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Sanderson
ED. E. KING ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
Y. P. KUHN -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
W. J. VAN LONDON ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
MRS. W. J. VAN LONDON ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
W. J. LAYLAND --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Cleburne
JAS. A. LITTLETON ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
BERT LOW --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
F. R. LUHN -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
GUY W. MCCARTY ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
DR. J. W. MCPHERSON --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dallas
DR. R. A. MADDOX ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
GEO. C. MARTIN ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Rockport
MRS. MILDRED PICKLE MAYALL ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Austin
GEO. L. MINTER -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
J. F. MORRISON --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
MRS. SARAH T. MORRISON --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
MRS. ANNIE MORAN ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Weatherford
LOUIS MONTGOMERY ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
M. C. NICHOLS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Fort Worth
BRUCE E. OLIVER ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
DR. JULIUS OLSEN ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
BUCKNER OSBURN ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
H. G. PAYNE ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Lubbock
GEO. L. PAXTON -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
POPE POOL -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
WENDELL H. POTTER -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Rockport
DR. CYRUS N. RAY ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
DR. RUPERT N. RICHARDSON ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
W. A. RINEY ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
E. B. SAYLES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
J. M. SELLERS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Rockport
EVERETT M. SHEPHERD ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
HOMER H. SCOTT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
J. O. SHELTON ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
MRS. GERTRUDE WINDSOR SMITH ------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
VICTOR J. SMITH ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Alpine
JAMES P. STINSON ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene
FLOYD V. STUDER ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Amarillo
MRS. MAUD DURLIN SULLIVAN ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ El Paso
W. G. SWENSON --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
H. A. TILLETT ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
DR. JOHN AUGUST UDDEN ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Austin
R. M. WAGSTAFF ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
PROF. OTTO O. WATTS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
ERNEST W. WILSON ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
H. H. WITTE ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Henrietta
PROF. A. WILLIAMS ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
PROF. E. WINEBRENNER ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Brownwood
C. W. WILSON ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
H. O. WOOTEN --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
W. H. WROTEN --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene
W.W. ZINGERY ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ABILENE

