Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

December 12, 2014
Subject: Final Letter Report #2014-6: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 696-Meter
Winterbotham Lateral Extension, Zavala County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our cultural resources survey of the Winterbotham Lateral
Extension (Figures 1-3).
The right-of-way (ROW) was examined by two archaeologists on December 10, 2014. Our
observations of the Project Area revealed that virtually the entire length of the pipeline has been
disturbed in historic times, and at the time of our survey the ROW was covered in secondary low
mesquite brush, other thorny brush, and prickly pear cactus (Figure 4).
The only evidence of cultural material observed was an isolated core reduction flake (Figure 5) on
a heavily disturbed, eroded, and deflated surface. Although interesting, this in and of itself is
assessed as non-significant. Based upon this, and the at best minimal potential for significant
archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, Tierras Antiguas recommends that
construction of the Winterbotham Lateral Extension as it is currently planned be allowed to proceed
with no further archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommends that
if any undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development along the pipeline, such
finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

Figure 1. Winterbotham Lateral Extension on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Winterbotham Lateral Extension on West Ranch (1974) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Figure 3. Soils map of the Project Area.

Figure 4. Archaeologist surveying the Winterbotham Lateral Extension ROW; facing south.

Figure 5. Core reduction flake manufactured from non-heat treated, fine-grained and
medium-grained chert.

